





WAI3IM)
(0ISER4II0
for the
4EI(







''pw
z\;i
17
A.3-....
...::.
•...











North American klaterbird (oneration Plan


Version  I
aterbirds have been  cherished by human societies for centuries. They have inspired poetry, music,  and fables and are often  touted as sym• bols of freedom,  strength,  and agility. This Plan provides  an overarch• ing framework and guide for conserving  waterbirds.  It sets forth goals
and priorities for waterbirds in all habitats from the  Canadian Arctic to the offshore  islands of Venezuela, from Bermuda to the  U.S.  Pacific Islands,  at nesting sites, during  annual  migrations and during  nonbreeding periods.  It
advocates continent-wide monitoring;  provides  an impetus for regional  con-      Clapper Rail
servation planning; proposes national,  provincial,  state,  and other local conservation planning  and action;  and creates a larger context within which  local habitat conservation can nest. Taken together,  we hope  that these  activities will assure healthy populations and habitats for the
waterbirds of the Americas.

This Plan is about weaving together cultures, opinions, resources,  and science to achieve sustainable waterbird populations and appropriately manage waterbird habitats throughout the  entirety of
their  ranges. The most encouraging  revelation that occurred  to us during
the years it took to develop  this Plan was the  great number of individuals, representing all factions of society, that were willing and eager to unite to accomplish  waterbird conservation. This shared passion for waterbirds
continue to be the force that moves waterbird conservation ahead in
2the Americas



Brown Boobies
; This Plan is in its  first version,  emphasizing seabirds  and other colonial•
ha- ,esting waterbirds.  It also concentrates on the  northern portions of its geographic scope.  Future versions  will include  more  guidance  on con•
servation of solitary-nesting waterbirds,  such as the  grebes  and rails,  and more details on the needs  and priorities of various  regions within the  overall Plan area,  especially  the  Caribbean, Central America, and Mexico. Moreover, publication of the  Plan is just one step in an initiative to further waterbird conservation.  Other anticipated products include  national waterbird plans, regional  waterbird plans,  a continental conservation status assessment document, training  work• shops,  educational materials, symposia,  and a continent-wide monitoring partnership.

This Plan was developed by an independent partnership of individuals  and organizations with interest and responsibility for conserving  waterbirds and their  habitats. Waterbird conservation in the Americas  is facilitated,  although not directed,  by this partnership. The partnership is a means of formalizing alliances to plan  and implement waterbird conservation cooperatively with other bird  initiatives and other national and regional  strategies for species  and habitat conservation.

The planning process  was possible  because  of the  voluntary engagement of hundreds  of experts on biology,  conservation, and management of waterbirds  (please  see the Acknowledgments). It also was made  possible  by the  firm backing  of government agencies  and private organizations, which  provided both moral  and financial  support. We thank  all for their  dedication to water•
birds  and for their  good work.


James Kushlan
Steering Committee  Chair
North American Waterbird Conservation Plan
Edgewater, Maryland
Melanie Steinkamp
Project Director
North American  Waterbird Conservation Plan
Laurel, Maryland



COVER PHOTO:  Roseate  Spoonbill,  © Nancy  Camel







WAI38IM) (0IS£WION for the
4EI(





North American Waterbird (onennation Plan


Version I








ate   JCP





Authors

James A. Kushlan',  Melanie  J. Steinkamp,  Katharine C.  Parsons, Jack Capp',
Martin Acosta  Cruz,  Malcolm  Coulter, Ian Davidson',  Loney Dickson, Naomi  Edelson", Richard  Elliot, R.  Michael  Erwin!",  Scott Hatch!',  Stephen Kress', Robert Milko",
Steve Miller", Kyra Mills!', Richard  Paull, Roberto Phillips", Jorge E. Saliva', Bill Sydeman!',
John Trapp", Jennifer  Wheeler!",  and Kent Wohl!9



Affiliations  of Authors

1           U.S.  Geological  Survey  and Smithsonian
Environmental Research  Center
2     U.S.  Geological  Survey,  Patuxent Wildlife  Research
Center
3     Manomet Center for Conservation Sciences
4    U.S.D.A.  Forest  Service International Program
5     University of Havana
6    Wetlands   lnternational,Storks,  Ibis,  Spoonbills
Specialist  Group
7     BirdLife  International,Americas  Division
8     Environment Canada,  Canadian Wildlife Service
9     International Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies
10 U.S.  Geological  Survey,  Patuxent Wildlife
Research  Center and University of Virginia
I U.S.  Geological  Survey, Alaska  Science  Center
I2  National Audubon Society,  Seabird  Restoration
Program  and  Cornell  Laboratory of Ornithology
3 Wisconsin  Department of Natural Resources
+ Point  Reyes Bird Observatory
I5  Audubon of Florida,  Florida  Coastal Islands  Sanctuaries
I6  Pronatura
7 U.S.  Fish and Wildlife Service,  Region  4
I8  U.S.  Fish and Wildlife Service,  Division  of Migratory
Bird Management
I9  U.S.  Fish and Wildlife  Service,  Region  7



Recommended Citation:
James A. Kushlan, Melanie J. Steinkamp,  Katharine  C. Parsons, Jack Capp, Martin Acos• ta Cruz, Malcolm  Coulter, Ian Davidson, Loney Dickson, Naomi  Edelson, Richard Elliot, R. Michael Erwin, Scott Hatch,  Stephen Kress, Robert Milko, Steve Miller,  Kyra Mills, Richard  Paul, Roberto  Phillips, Jorge E.  Saliva, Bill Sydeman, John Trapp, Jennifer Wheeler, and Kent Wohl. 2002.  Waterbird Conservation for the Americas: The North American Waterbird Conservation Plan, Version  1. Waterbird Conservation for the Americas, Washington,  DC, US.A.,  78 pp.

Copies  of this publication may be downloaded from www.waterbirdconservation.org. Hard  copies may be requested from:

U.S.  Fish and Wildlife  Service National Publications  Clearinghouse
National Conservation Training  Center
Shepherdstown, WV25443, U.S.A.
1-304-876-7203
In the U.S., call toll-free:  1-800-344-WILD  (9453) Waterbirds@fws.gov
TABLE of (OTEITS








Executive Summary                                                                                                        3

Part 1: What Future for Waterbirds?                                                                          5
A Call to Action                                                                                                       5
A Vision for Waterbird Conservation in the Americas                                                 6
A Common Framework                                                                                           7


Part 2:  State of the Resource                                                                                      15
Population Status                                                                                                            15
Population Conservation Issues and Threats                                                               16
Species  Conservation Status                                                                                          23
Habitat Needs                                                                                                                 26
Habitat Conservation Issues and Threats                                                                    27
Key Sites for Waterbirds                                                                                                30
Inventory and Monitoring                                                                                       32
Scientific Information Needs                                                                                         34
Communication, Education and Public Awareness                                                    35


Part 3:  Moving Forward through Partnerships                                                      37
International Waterbird Conservation                                                                    37
National Waterbird Conservation                                                                           39
Regional Waterbird Conservation                                                                          .41
Local Waterbird Conservation                                                                                52
The Bottom Line                                                                                                            53
Partners in Implementation                                                                                          .55


Part 4: Achieving  the Vision:  Summary of Strategies  and Outcomes   .....  .58
Vision                                                                                                                              .58
Species and Population Goal                                                                                         58
Habitat Goal                                                                                                                    59
Education and Information  Goal                                                                                  60
Coordination and Integration Goal                                                                              60

Top to bottom:  Herring Gull, skimmers and gulls, Tricolored Heron

Appendices                                                                                                                                                                  61
APPENDIX   1. Names,  Estimated Population Sizes,  and Conservation Status  of Waterbirds                                   62
APP ENDIX  2.  Conservation Status Assessment Protocol for Colonial  Waterbirds                                                    67
APP ENDIX  3.  Distribution and Activity of Colonial  Waterbird Species                                                                     69


Acknowledgments                                                                                                                                                        7 6





e#'.°.v,

-·~        ·.·
-       .·
·•$.
',,
i
.      ,'























































To cherish what remains  ofthe Earth and to foster its renewal is our only legitimate hope ofsurvival.

Wendell Berry
WATERBIRD CONSERVATION for the AMERICAS

DI:CJ7/E 90/148I


A Niion and framework                           many waterbirds increases  population risks by concen•
trating populations in limited areas.
he North American Waterbird Conservation Plan (the Plan) is the product of an independent partner• ship of individuals  and institutions having interest
and responsibility for conservation of waterbirds and their  habitats in the Americas. This partnership• Waterbird Conservation for the Americas-was created to support a vision in which  the  distribution,  diversity, and abundance of populations  and habitats of breeding, migratory,  and nonbreeding waterbirds  are sustained or restored throughout the lands  and waters of North America,  Central America, and the  Caribbean.

The  Plan provides  a continental-scale framework for the  conservation and management of 210 species of waterbirds,  including  seabirds,  coastal waterbirds, wad• ing birds,  and marshbirds utilizing aquatic habitats in
29 nations throughout
North America,  Central America, the islands and pelagic waters of the Caribbean Sea and western Atlantic, the U.S.-associated Pacific Islands and pelagic waters of the Pacific.  Birds as familiar  as herons,  loons, pel• icans,  and gulls,  as well as
the lesser known  albatrosses,
petrels,  auks,  and rails are among the species consid• ered in the Plan.  These
birds'  dependence on aquat•
ic habitats such as wooded swamps,  stream corridors, salt marshes, barrier  islands, continental shelf waters and open pelagic waters make them  especially vulnerable to the  myriad  threats facing
water and wetland resources

(onernation (hallenges

he conservation of waterbirds faces significant chal• lenges.  Eighty percent of the  species considered in the Plan are colonial nesters-congregating at breed•
ing sites in numbers ranging from many to hundreds  of
thousands of birds.  Of this group, the Plan finds that
one-third are considered to be at risk of serious popula• tion loss.  Eleven species  of pelagic seabirds  are highly imperiled,  and 36 species of pelagic and coastal seabirds as well as seven species of wading  birds  are of high con• servation  concern.Although  non-colonial waterbirds remain  to be assessed quantitatively,  many of these populations  are also clearly at risk. Waterbird popula• tions  are subject to numerous threats, many of which
are habitat-based and affect
all aquatic birds  and other aquatic resources. The threats that the  Plan identi• fies as requiring remedial
action include  destruction of
inland  and coastal wetlands, introduced predators and invasive species, pollutants, mortality from fisheries  and other human industries,  dis• turbance,  and conflicts aris• ing from abundant species.

Additional information on population sizes and trends is needed to improve  the assessment of conservation misk,  as well as allow a
?')detailed assessment of the
relative  importance of spe•
+_           ''     cific areas to the various
\., ., ~    ); species and the effectiveness

globally.  In addition,  the congregatory behavior of


Black-footed Albatross
)    +>   @   of waterbird management
prescriptions.  More precise


WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                      3





























Common Moorhen

information on spatial habitat needs is also needed; presently,  there is little information  on habitat use out• side of the breeding  season for many  species,  particular• ly during migration.  Critical to the  effective manage• ment of waterbird populations  and habitats will be increasing  knowledge,  through monitoring and research, broadly  disseminating this information,  and encourag• ing conservation  action by policy makers, wildlife man• agers,  and the public.

(onerration Solution

he  Plan identifies  strategies  and opportunities for achieving its vision.  It documents  a dynamic  process for species status  assessment to inform  setting of
conservation priorities at a regional  scale,  and has iden•
tified  many of the  key issues requiring  conservation action.The  Plan has involved  the  scientific  community, especially through partnership with ornithological societies,  in identifying information needs.  It
proposes  the development of a continental monitoring partnership including  stan• dardized  methodology, bias-assessment,
and internet-accessible database sys• tems  to support status  and trend evaluation.


4
The  Plan promotes habitat and site-based conservation actions throughout the Americas,  especially via the Important Bird Areas programs  and similar efforts. Regional waterbird conservation working  groups will step  down  the continental-level  aspects  of the  Plan to the regional  and local levels. At all scales, the  Plan advocates integration of waterbird conservation with other bird  conservation initiatives when  appropriate,  in order  to efficiently provide  the best management options  for local wildlife  and habitat managers.

An evolving Waterbird Conservation Council  will facili• tate implemention of the  Plan, assess its effectiveness, and plan the  future course  of waterbird conservation. Finally,  the  Plan details resources  and infrastructure needed  to more  fully accomplish  waterbird conserva• tion.  Rather than establishing new  structures, imple• mentation of the  Plan will be entrusted to governmen•
tal and nongovernmental entities,  especially national governments,  state governments,  habitat Joint
Ventures and other partnerships,  and conser•
vation-oriented nongovernmental




Black-crowned Night-Heron
O NANCY CAMEL


WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE   AMERICAS










A  (all to Ation
PART  I


MT IT\RC for NATER8IR0


Despite their  value,  or perhaps because  of it,  waterbirds have not always fared well at the hands  of humans.  In
aterbirds include  the  albatrosses and shearwaters admired by sailors and rarely seen on shore; they are the  gregarious  gulls and pelicans  working  the
coastlines  and the  graceful herons  and flamingos  poised over still,  shallow waters; the rare Whooping Crane  and abundant Common Murre  are both waterbird species; and the  secretive rails in the  marshes, the ostentatious puffins  and boobies  of the  rocky cliffs,  and the graceful loons of open  lakes fall into this diverse group  of aquat• ic species.

These  birds  constitute  a natural resource  of great intrin• sic, human and ecological value that needs to be pro• tected and fostered through appropriate management. Spectacular in appearance or in numbers, waterbirds
are conspicuous representatives  of their  exotic, mysteri•
ous,  and wild aquatic worlds. Throughout history, they have fig• ured  prominently in human culture, serving as sources of food and orna• mentation,  as well as folkloric  or totemic figures.  Even today, many serve as symbols of cultural identity, conservation organizations,  environ• mental programs,  or locales. Water• birds  are a favorite  of birdwatchers, who number nearly a hundred mil• lion people  and contribute  signifi• cantly to communities and business• es in their  pursuits.  Some species
are a boon  to sportsmen,  such as the
seabird  flocks leading  anglers to their catch.  Beyond their  cultural significance, waterbirds are often useful as indicators  of environmen-   _

tal quality and ecosystem health.        ' The conservation of waterbirds can    j
help  protect the broader landscape    9
in which  they  occur.                                 Sandhill Cranes
one case,  the harm  was irreversible. The last sighting of the  Great Auk in 1852  heralded the  extinction of this colonial waterbird species through direct hunting impacts.  Fortunately, the mass destruction of egrets by market hunting in the  late  1800s  and early  1900s was stemmed in time,  and in fact,  led to the modern con• servation movement in North America. Yet as illustrat• ed by the  crash of the  Brown Pelican population in the Gulf of Mexico  due to contaminants, waterbirds are
still at risk due to human activities.  Species such as the
Short-tailed Albatross,  Newell's  Shearwater,  Black-vent• ed Shearwater,  Black-footed Albatross,  Bermuda  Petrel, and Hawaiian  Coot,  listed by the World  Conservation Union  (IUCN)  as vulnerable,  could share the  Great Auk's  fate unless they  receive proper  conservation attention.


Sunbittern        Sandhill Crane        Common Crane  _ Whooping Crane  _ Limpkin         Sungrebe  2 Yellow Rail  2


WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                      5
Some  waterbirds  continue to be threatened  by  direct impacts  of human activities.  Longline  and gill net fisheries  kill large numbers  of seabirds  through entanglement  and drowning.  Oil  spills from  ships  and chronic  bilge  discharge  sicken  and kill hundreds  of thousands  of water•
birds.  Impacts  from  exposure  to pes- ticides  and other  chemicals,  which caused  population declines  in Dou• ble-crested Cormorants and Brown Pelicans in the  1960s  and  1970s,
continue to threaten waterbirds in
places throughout the Americas.
Food concentrated in aquaculture      £









TERN NESTING
AREA

DO NOT ENTER

NATIONAL PARK  SERVICE

"               .                               ,,··.•11   ,~r,;·,
r                             !lf
·•.·   ';:    ,~         .         .                    '                     !        r.o··  :'-  --·
appropriate management,  most waterbird habitats will no longer provide  for healthy  and diverse populations of waterbirds.

A Wiion for Waterbird
(onervation in the  Amerita

hreats to waterbirds and their habitats have stimulated a signif• icant response  by individuals
and organizations concerned with their  conservation. The Waterbird Conservation for the Americas  ini•
tiative (the Waterbird initiative)
ponds  and hatchery facilities attracts ?
I.,
'

,·.

was launched in 1998 to link these

herons,  cormorants, terns,  and peli-
:<
cans,  and may result  in legal or           O
illegal killing by distressed fish farm-    Common  Tern
ers.  Citizens sometimes look upon
waterbirds with disfavor when  nesting or roosting con• gregations in urban  and suburban environments  conflict with aesthetic standards.  Public disaffection with water• birds,  warranted or not,  may be among their  greatest long-term threats.

The  habitats  of waterbirds-the important sites  on which  they  depend for nesting,  feeding  and wintering• are also at risk due to human related and natural
threats.  Hydrologic  change of freshwater wetlands,
degradation of coastal and marine  habitats,  and deple• tion  of the  food base all adversely  affect waterbirds. Habitat loss and degradation can cause population declines.  For example, the Marbled  Murrelet has declined dramatically due to the  destruction  of its nest• ing habitat from logging of old growth forests  along the Pacific Coast of North America.  More insidious  are patch-by-patch losses occurring  in wetlands  and other aquatic habitats,  as they  are drained,  channelized, manipulated,  over-fished, plowed,  or altered  in response to human pressures. Even cumulatively,  these  may go unnoticed due to the piecemeal fashion  of loss. For
some species,  such as the Double-crested Cormorant and Ring-billed  Gull,  habitat changes  have resulted in artificial food sources  and subsequent population increases and expansion.  These  may threaten other bird
species or result  in human conflicts. Without active and

efforts,  and is an international, broad-based,  voluntary partnership dedicated to waterbird conserva• tion.  In Canada,  the U.S., and Mexi•
co, it complements the  initiatives existing for other bird groups, specifically  the North American Waterfowl Management Plan,  Partners in Flight,  and the national Shorebird Plans,  all of which  come  together in the
North American Bird Conservation Initiative  (NABCI).
In addition,  the Waterbird initiative addresses conserva• tion of waterbirds in the  Caribbean,  Central America, and open waters of the Pacific and Atlantic.



The vision of Waterbird Conservation for the Americas  is that the distribution, diversity, and abundance  ofpopulations and habitats ofbreeding, migratory,  and nonbreeding waterbirds are sustained or restored  through• out the lands and waters  ofNorth America, Central America, and the Caribbean.



It is recognized that sustainability is inherently hard  to quantify and judge.  Sustainability implies that popula• tions  are healthy and vigorous,  and that human-caused adversities  do not affect demographic parameters in ways that reduce  populations below  what existing
ecosystems  or ecosystems managed  at varying capacities

Ocellated Crake   z Ruddy  Crake   e White-throated Crake   _ Gray-breasted Crake   z Black Rail   r


6                                                                                                                    WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
should  support.  Sustainability  does  not imply  stasis  in population size,  trend or distribution.  Sustainability must be  achieved at all scales  and  within contemporary social  and  economic contexts.  It is particularly difficult to quantify sustainability on a continental scale,  as it must be extrapolated from  smaller  scales.  Finally, sus• tainability will need  to be most precisely defined for species under threat,  including both rare and abundant species.

Four  goals were  developed to achieve  the vision for waterbirds:

■ Species  and Population  Goal
To ensure  sustainable distributions,  diversity and abun• dance  of waterbird species  throughout each of their historical or naturally expanding ranges  in the lands and waters of North America,  Central America, and the Caribbean.

■ Habitat Goal
To protect,  restore,  and manage  sufficient high  quality habitat and key sites for waterbirds throughout the year to meet species and population goals.

■ Education  and Information Goal
To ensure  that information on the conservation of waterbirds is widely  available  to decision  makers,  land managers,  the public,  and all whose  actions  affect waterbird populations  and their habitats.

■ Coordination and Integration  Goal
To ensure  that coordinated conservation efforts for waterbirds in the Americas continue,  are guided
by common principles,  and result  in integrated and mutually supportive waterbird conservation actions.

A (ommon  framework

chieving the vision for waterbird conservation will involve  activities over a huge  geographical area,  multiple scales of planning and imple•
mentation,  and involvement of numerous partners from  government and nongovernmental organiza• tions, from the scientific community,  and from
local citizenry. Thus, it is highly  desirable that the
foundations, tenets, priorities,  strategies and structures to the extent possible.

Waterbird Conservation for the Americas:  The North American Waterbird Conservation Plan (the Plan) pro• vides a common framework for managers and conserva• tionists to proceed with actions intended to benefit waterbirds.  It aims to facilitate continent-wide planning and monitoring,  national-state-provincial conservation planning and action,  regional  planning and coordina• tion,  and local habitat protection and management.

A Matter of Scale
Conservation of waterbirds is an international matter. Many  species  considered in the Plan range  through a number of countries in the Plan area,  and the distribu• tions  of some species extend to other continents. Win• tering habitats used  in one country may be supporting breeding populations in another. Populations that migrate across international borders must be evaluated at continental or even global scales.  Moreover, some resource issues,  such as fish stock management,  are inherently international. Thus,  maintaining waterbird populations in the Americas at levels necessary  for their long-term conservation requires that planning,  invento• ry, monitoring,  and management action be carried  out
as international activities.  Conservation at this largest scale is the principal focus  of this Plan.
various  stakeholders  agree to common definitions,      Common Loon


Buff-banded Rail          Guam Rail   2  Clapper  Rail          King Rail    2 Virginia Rail    2  Corn Crake   2


WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                       7
Conservation of waterbirds  is a national matter.  Most national governments  have  responsibility for managing birds,  especially  endemic  and migratory  species.  Nation• al governments  are also responsible for habitat  manage• ment on government lands  and  in varying  degrees  for regulation of factors  affecting  habitat  quality,  such  as pollution,  wetland protections,  and land  development.
It is recommended that national governments  and  other stakeholders  consider  development of national strate• gies to  guide  waterbird  conservation at this  scale.

Conservation of waterbirds  is a regional  matter. Between  seasons  and years,  local sites  of populations may  shift  within larger  geographic  or ecological  regions. Regional  conservation action requires  cooperation among  neighboring political  units  such  as states,
provinces,  and nations.  Conservation planning  at this scale will be  addressed  in regional  waterbird  plans  and will be  implemented  through regional  partnerships of private  conservationists  and waterbird biologists  in state,  provincial,  and national governments.

Conservation of waterbirds  within large nations  is a state  and provincial  matter.  In Canada,  provincial  gov• ernments  have  principal responsibility for habitat  and for the  management of some  waterbirds.  In  the  U.S., states  have  principal  statutory  and/or  constitutional responsibility for all wildlife  within state  borders• managing  hunting,  parks,  sanctuaries,  and  other  activi• ties  affecting waterbirds-and  concurrent jurisdiction with the  federal  government on migratory  species.

Conservation of waterbirds  is a local matter.  Local com•
mitment to waterbird  conservation is essential.  Local governments  in
management themes  can be  enacted that would  posi• tively  affect a suite  of species.  Conservation at the  local scale  will be  addressed  through local planning  and actions  of local constituencies,  especially  community• based  organizations.

Geographic  Extent of the Plan
The  geographic  extent of this Plan is immense. As shown in Figure 1,  it includes  North America,  Central America, the  islands and waters  of the  Caribbean, the Pacific Ocean  including  the U.S.-associated Pacific Islands,  and the western Atlantic Ocean  including Bermuda.

The  Plan area is organized  into several planning  regions (see Figure 1),  which  were  created in order  to facilitate planning  at a scale that was practical, yet allowed  a landscape-level perspective. The regional boundaries are based  on a combination of political considerations  and ecological factors. The  Central American nations and their  coastal  zones are combined into  one planning region,  as are all of the  Caribbean Islands.  In Canada,
the U.S.,  and Mexico,  planning  regions  are based  on composites of Bird Conservation Regions (BCRs) and Pelagic Bird Conservation Regions  (PBCRs)  (see Figure
2). The  BCRs are terrestrial geographic  areas having
similar habitats  and were  developed to provide  a con• sistent spatial framework for NABCI's  bird conserva• tion strategy1.  The  PBCRs were  created specifically  for this  Plan as marine  analogs of terrestrial BCRs,  in order to address the  conservation needs  of seabirds. They  are very similar to the  Large Marine  Ecosystems  developed by IUCN, the U.S. National  Oceanic  and Atmospheric
many  countries are responsible  for
The Plan area includes  the interests  of 29 nations:
zoning,  development permitting, and local environmental  quality. Nesting and roosting  waterbirds are particularly affected by local conditions.  Fortunately,  the  con• gregatory behavior  of most water• birds provides  opportunities  for effective,  efficient conservation action at the  local scale. Also, because  different species  utilize the same  habitats,  common  con•
servation  principles and similar
Canada, United States  (including Pacific and Caribbean islands), Mexico,  Guatemala,  Belize, Honduras,  EI Salvador, Nicaragua, Costa Rica,  Panama, Venezuela (the Caribbean islands),  Bermuda, Bahamas, Jamaica,  Cuba,  Haiti, Dominican Republic, Anguilla, Antigua & Barbuda,  St.  Kitts  & Nevis,  Dominica,  St.  Lucia,  St. Vincent & the  Grenadines,
Barbados,  Granada, Trinidad  & Tobago, Netherlands  (the islands of Aruba,  Bonaire,  Curacao,  Saba,  St. Eustatius,  St. Maarten),  France (St. Pierre et Miquelon Archipelago, the islands of Martinique,  Guadeloupe, St. Martin,  St.  Barthelemy),  Great Britain  (the islands Turks & Caicos, Cayman  Islands, British Virgin Islands,  Montserrat)

Rufous-necked Wood-Rail  Gray-necked Wood-Rail  » Uniform Crake  _ Spotted Crake        Sora  2 Spotless Crake


8                                                                                                                    WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
figure 1. Geographic Extent of Waterbird Conservation for the Americas: The North American Waterbird
Conservation Plan,  Showing  Waterbird Conservation Planning Regions






























..e.e
..-...a.e.e.-.•..
....   ,,.._.,.,..,
.-..-.,_.,_.,._.,.,...

- Alaska/Bering/Yukon
D Arctic Canada
D Pacific Coast
[]sea

- lntermountain West
- Northern Prairie and Parkland

[] upper Mississippi Valley/Great takes D Mid Atlantic/New England/Maritimes Cl comaPanes

- Southeast U.S.
[l eceo-southwest0.s
css»an
[] canal Mana

- Pacific Islands (Hawaii and other U.S.- associated islands)
[ central Atlantic (deep waters. roughly east to 409. south to Equator) [] central Pacific (deep waters, roughly west to 180°, south to Equator)
,..,,...,.,...
......



Yellow-breasted Crake        White-browed Crake        Zapata  Rail  2 Colombian  Crake  2 Paint-billed Crake 2


WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                      9
figure 2. Bird Conservation Regions































































Spotted Rail           Purple Swamphen   _ Purple Gallinule    _ Azure Gallinule    _ Common Moorhen    2


10                                                                                                                          WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
figure z legend

BCRs
1     Aleutian/Bering  Sea Islands
2    Western  Alaska
3   Arctic Plains  and  Mountains
4  Northwestern Interior  Forest
5   Northen Pacific  Rainforest
6  Boreal  Taiga  Plains
7   Taiga  Shield  and  Hudson Plains
8    Boreal  Softwood  Shield
9   Great Basin
10  Northern Rockies
11 Prairie  Potholes
12 Boreal  Hardwood Transition
13 Lower Great Lakes/St.  Lawrence
Plain
14 Atlantic Northern Forest
15  Sierra  Nevada
16 Southern  Rockies/Colorado  Plateau
17 Badlands and  Prairies
18 Shortgrass  Prairie
19 Central Mixed-grass  Prairie
20 Edwards  Plateau
21 Oaks  and Prairies
22 Eastern Tallgrass Prairie
23 Prairie  Hardwood Transition
24 Central Hardwoods
25 West Gulf  Coastal  Plain/Ouachitas
26  Mississippi Alluvial Valley
27 Southeastern Coastal  Plain
28 Appalachian Mountains
29 Piedmont
30 New  England/Mid-Atlantic Coast
31 Peninsular  Florida
32 Coastal  California
33 Sonoran  and Mohave  Deserts
34 Sierra Madre  Occidental
35 Chihuahuan Desert
36 Tamaulipan Brushlands
37 Gulf Coastal Prairie
38 Islas Marias
39 Sierras de Baja California
40 Desierto de Baja California
41 Islas de! Golfo  de Californa
42 Sierra y Planicies  de El Cabo
43 Planicie  Costera,  Lomerios  y Cafiones de Occidente
44 Marismas  Nacionales
45 Planicie  Costera  y Lomerios  del
Pacifico Sur
46 Sur de! Altiplano  Mexicano
47 Eije  Neovolc~nico  Transversal
48 Sierra Madre  Oriental
49 Planicie  Costera  y Lomerios  Secos de!
Golfo  de Mexico
50 Cuenca  de!  Rio Balsas
5I Valle de Tehuac~n-Cuicatlin
52 Planicie  Costery y Lomerios  H~medos del Golfo  de Mexico
53 Sierra Madre  de! Sur
54 Sierra Norte de Puebla-Oaxaca
55 Planicie  Noroccidetal  de Yucatan
56 Planicie  de la Peninsula  de Yucat~n
57 Isla Cozumel
58 Altos  de Chiapas
59 Depresiones Intermontanas
60 Sierra Madre  de Chiapas
61 Planicie  Costera  de!  Soconusco
62 Archipi~lago  de Revillagigedo
63 Isla Guadalupe
64 Arrecife  Alacranes
65 Los Tuxtlas
66 Panatanos  de Centla-Laguna  de
T~rminos
67 Hawaii

PBCRs
68 Chukchi & Beaufort  Seas
69 East Bering Sea
70 Gulf of Alaska
71 California  Current
72 Pacific Central-American Coastal
73 Gulf of California
7 4 Gulf of Mexico
75 Newfoundland-Laborador Shelf
76 West Greenland Shelf
77 Southeast U.S.  Continental Shelf
78 Northeast U.S.  Continental Shelf
79 Scotian  Shelf
80 Insular  Pacific-Hawaiian
81 Caribbean Sea
82 Pacific
83 Atlantic
84 Hudson Bay
85 Arctic  Ocean

Terrestrial  BCRs not  yet developed for the  Caribbean and  Central  America


Administration (NOAA)  and the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO (10C), with some practical modifications suggested by regional waterbird managers. The  PBCRs shown  in Figure 2 include  both coastal  (up to 200 miles offshore)  and open-ocean areas of the Atlantic and Pacific.

Though  the Plan does have a defined  geographic  extent, it is recognized  that the conservation needs of water• birds  do not stop  at any discrete borders. Thus, when appropriate  and acceptable,  activities under  the  Plan should  be linked to activities beyond  the Plan area.  For example,  seabird conservation in Canada  will be coordi• nated with conservation  and management in Greenland, where  appropriate. Where  possible,  conservation  across all Pacific islands will be considered  when  planning  for
U.S. holdings in the Pacific. It is hoped  that the Plan will
eventually link to conservation initiatives in South
America.


Taxonomic  Extent of the Plan
The  Plan addresses the  conservation needs  and oppor• tunities for 210 species of birds in 23 families that spend  at least part of the year in the  Plan area (see Table  1). The  complete  list of included species is given in Appendix I, along with 39 species occurring  only accidentally or casually in the  Plan area.

All of the  species  addressed  in the  Plan are dependent on aquatic habitats to complete portions  of their  life cycles,  hence  the term "waterbirds." They can be further characterized by other non-technical terms  relating to where  they typically  forage:  seabirds  (birds primarily
feeding  in open  ocean);  coastal waterbirds  (primarily
Eurasian  Coot (Common)   2 Hawaiian Coot    2 American  Coot    _ Caribbean Coot    2 Great Skua   ~

WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   11
utilizing the interface between land  and  both salt and  fresh  water);  wading  birds  (principally feeding
by wading  in shallow  waters),  and  marshbirds  (often
secretive,  feeding  in primarily fresh  waters).  These

TABLE 1.  Families and Species  of Waterbirds Included  in Waterbird  Conservation for the Americas: The North American  Waterbird  Conservation Plan
terms  are not exclusive. Admittedly,  there are many other  kinds  of birds  that rely  on  aquatic habitats, including shorebirds,  waterfowl,  raptors,  and  many songbirds;  however,  these species  are the focus  of other  initiatives  such  as the Shorebird  Plans,  the North American Waterfowl  Management Plan,  and Partners  in Flight.

This  first version  of the Plan  provides  detailed  infor•
mation on the waterbirds  that nest colonially,  as they were  the original  focus  of the Waterbird  initia• tive. The  waterbird  families  that contain  colonial• nesting species  are  noted  in Table  1   by  asterisks; these are generally  the seabirds,  coastal waterbirds, and wading  birds.  Subsequent  versions  of the Plan
will  address  solitary-nesting  waterbirds,  generally  the marshbirds,  in greater detail.

Biological Considerations
Conservation action for waterbirds involves  many opportunities and challenges  because of the funda• mental biology  that unites these species. The  Plan
takes into account the following  biological charac•

Families Gaviidae Podicipedidae Diomedeidae Procellariidae Hydrobatidae Phaethontidae Sulidae Pelecanidae Phalacrocoracidae Anhingidae Fregatidae Ardeidae Threskiornithidae Ciconiidae Phoenicopteridae Accipitridae Rallidae Heliornithidae Eurypygidae Aramidae
Gruidae Laridae Alcidae

Species loons grebes albatrosses
shearwaters, petrels, fulmars
storm-petrels tropicbirds boobies, gannet pelicans cormorants darters,  anhinga frigatebirds
herons, egrets, bitterns ibises,  spoonbill
storks flamingo Snail Kite rails sungrebe sunbittern limpkin cranes
gulls, terns, skimmers, skua, jaeger
auks, murres, puffins, murrelets, guillemots
teristics and advocates their consideration in all other planning and implementation activities for
waterbirds.

Family includes some or all colonial-nesting species, which are addressed in detail in Version 1   of the Plan.  Future versions will further address remaining families.

Distribution and Range
❖  Many waterbirds have large ranges  that cross national and continental borders,  or span oceans,  and individu• als may cover enormous distances in their lifetimes over periods  of years or even weeks.
❖  Breeding, wintering and migratory distributions change continually due to natural and human-related causes.
❖   Some  species use recognizable migration flyways.
❖   Some populations spend  only part of the year within any one area,  including the Plan area.
❖  Distributions in some  areas, such as the Arctic and
tropics,  are very poorly  understood.

Dependence on Aquatic Systems
❖  These  birds  use aquatic habitats, such as ponds, rivers,  lakes,  wetlands,  coastal and offshore pelagic
systems for feeding  and other activities.
❖  Marine  seabirds constitute the majority of species  in the Plan and rely on prey populations associated with continental shelf and open  ocean  waters.
❖  In habitat patches that are relatively unaltered,
waterbirds depend on the maintenance of natural conditions.
❖  Most wetland systems in the Plan area have been altered.  In these altered  habitat patches, birds often depend on human management.

Demography
❖  Most waterbirds are long-lived,  have low annual reproductive output,  high juvenile mortality, but high adult survivorship.
❖  Reproductive success in any one year may not be as
critical to population sustainability as adult  mortality.

South Polar Skua   2 Pomarine Jaeger   _ Parasitic Jaeger   _ Long-tailed Jaeger    _ Black Skimmer   =


12                                                                                                                           WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
❖   The  population consequences  of reproduc• tive failure  are postponed in long-lived species with delayed  maturity,  hence  moni• toring should incorporate measures  of pro• ductivity and survival as well as population surveys.
❖  Low inter-year variability in populations of
long-lived  waterbirds,  such as many sea•
birds,  enhances  the  ability to detect popula•
tion trends.

Coloniality-Concentration
❖  Concentration at colonies  is the  defining biological  characteristic of many species of
waterbirds.



Royal Terns
❖  Colony  site  character changes with time,  often due to natural causes.
❖  Some species are faithful to nesting sites;  others change sites frequently.
❖  Concentration at feeding,  roosting and loafing sites makes specific  sites disproportionately important to populations.
❖  Many waterbirds  concentrate during  migration and in
over-wintering areas.


Underlying Tenets
Certain assumptions are central to waterbird conserva• tion strategies,  processes,  and  implementation.The  fol• lowing points  describe  the  underlying tenets  of the Plan, which  should  be adopted in all waterbird conser• vation activities.

Integrated Bird Conservation
Waterbirds  occur in habitats used by other birds  and by people. Thus, the wisest course for conservation action
is within the  context of multi-species  and multi-use management, which  will increase  efficiency  and effec• tiveness while reducing  costs.

In protecting and managing  aquatic habitats, the needs of all birds relying on these  habitats  should be coordi• nated,  whenever possible.  In these  multi-species conser• vation programs,  the needs  of waterbirds should  receive equal  consideration to those  of other species.  Effective• ly meeting the  needs  of multiple species groups  is the purpose  of NABCI. Thus, in Canada,  the U.S. and Mex• ico, this  Plan should  be considered alongside plans for
other groups  of aquatic species, thereby facilitating the
inclusion  of waterbirds in further planning  and imple• mentation of "all-bird" conservation. Also, because  of limited resources,  waterbird conservation in Mexico, Central America, and the  Caribbean would  be most effective if part of an effort for all aquatic bird species. For these regions, the  Plan proposes  partnerships of rel• evant initiatives  and the  creation of plans that include all aquatic birds.

Multi-use management of aquatic habitats, such as for water supply, flood control,  wetland protection,  fish• eries,  and recreation,  should  incorporate the habitat and population needs  of waterbirds  as one of its  goals.

A Foundation  on Science and Experience Wherever possible,  conservation strategies should be based  on rigorous  scientific  and practical knowledge.
The knowledge  about waterbird biology and the threats facing waterbirds form links between broad  conserva• tion  goals and the specific  conservation programs  need• ed to protect bird species and their  habitats.

Knowledge  to make  informed conservation decisions must be current,  as complete as possible,  and readily available.  Planning  for the  conservation of species that change nesting locations year to year or change feeding locations  on a daily or weekly basis will require  under• standing populations  at many scales.  Critical knowledge needed  includes  population trends  and dynamics, key habitats,  and important areas.

Fortunately,  for many waterbird species and in many areas, basic biological  information is sufficiently strong

Band-tailed Gull         Black-tailed Gull         Gray Gull   2 Yellow-legged Gull   z Heermann's Gull   2 Mew Gull  2


WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   13
social factors  as well  as biological  ones, and  these  must be  considered in conser• vation planning.  Management must seek to achieve  population and habitat health and sustainability as defined  in ways con• sistent with scientific knowledge, which may require  explicit management of
both biological  and human factors.


Although available scientific information and practical experience must be used to inform  management actions,  conservation cannot always wait for complete infor• mation. The  Plan urges critical conserva• tion  action be initiated with due  speed based  on best available  knowledge but in an adaptive manner.

An Adaptive Approach
Effective waterbird conservation requires an innovative,  dynamic,  iterative process of planning,  implementation,  evaluation of that implementation,  and revision  of action plans when  necessary. The Plan encourages the  incorporation of approaches that permit evaluation of the results  of management action in terms  of
the underlying scientific hypotheses.










Snowy Egret


to support conservation action.  In addition,  locally gained knowledge is often  sufficiently robust to extrap• olate to other situations.  However,  there  are many sig• nificant gaps in knowledge,  and the  Plan recommends that research  and monitoring on waterbirds be expand• ed,  targeted and disseminated to meet the  increased demands of scientifically based  conservation.

The management of waterbirds,  especially  abundant fish-eating colonial waterbirds, involves economic and
Evaluating the  effects of conservation action results in the  development of an agenda for further research,  provides needed data for adaptive management models,  further informs  subsequent man• agement action,  and influences the  revi• sion process.

To be adaptive, conservation requires flexibility and openness  to redirection or change,  such as might be justified by the  results  of research, moni• toring,  and experiential learning.  Flexibility in the mechanisms used to deliver waterbird conservation is particularly important in multi-national strategies.

1      The North American Bird Conservation Initiative:  Bringing It All
Together;  U.S. NABCI Committee, September 2000

2 An Ecosystem Strategy for the Assessment  and Management of
International  Coastal  Ocean  Waters.  IUCN, NOAA and IOC.
1998  (see www.edc.uri.edu/lme)

Ring-billed Gull   2 California  Gull   z Great Black-backed Gull          Glaucous-winged  Gull   2 Western Gull


14                                                                                                                          WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
PART2

1IE of the RE0UR(


he Plan has as a principal focus the  identification and facilitation of conservation action at a conti•
nental scale. Recommended actions
are based  on an examination of the state of waterbird populations and
waterbird habitats,  including  associ-    g
ated issues and threats. They  also
pertain to inventory and monitoring   o
are not provided in Appendix 1   due to a lack of information.

For many  species,  population data derive from colony-based monitoring programs of varying intensity that estimated breeding pairs  during  the
1990s. Therefore,  population esti•
mates, in most cases, best reflect
programs, research,  and communica• tion,  education and public  awareness activities critical to conserving  all waterbirds in the Americas.

Population tat1u






Parakeet Auklets
breeding populations.  In cases where non-breeding individuals were  also present at colony-sites, these  esti• mates may approximate total popu• lations in the  Plan area. Total popula- tion  and wintering population infor•
mation are lacking for most species and most of the
stimates of current population sizes and trends  for colonial  waterbirds occurring in the  Plan area are provided in Appendix 1. [Data for solitary nesting
waterbirds  (marshbirds)  will be presented in subse• quent versions  of the  Plan.]  These  numbers and trends were  derived  from the  best professional judgment of species  experts  and information from the  literature. The time  period  used to estimate trends for most species
was 1970 to present,  and the  precision and accuracy  of this information vary widely.

For such large,  conspicuous,  and in some cases economically important
Plan area.


As  shown  in Figure 3, the  estimates of population trend for 166 species  of colonial  waterbirds indicate that
seven percent of species  are showing  a biologically  sig•
nificant population decline  and another 24 percent show apparent declines.  Importantly, up to  1 7 percent show population increases.  Generally these  increases are due to populations rebounding from previous
reductions due to contaminants or hunting,  or are relat•
ed to increased availability of artificial food sources.
waterbirds,  it is astounding how  few and how poor  are the  available data on population status.  Historical continen•
tal estimates are largely not available.
figure2. Estimated Population  Trends for Colonial  Waterbirds



I biologically  significant population decline

Some significant attempts to estimate populations occurred during  the  1970s and 1980s, but these  efforts and some continuing monitoring programs  were limited in geographic extent.  Popula• tion  estimates for approximately 20% of colonial  species,  including most
species not breeding in the  Plan area,
A"

12%


37%
■  apparent population decline
■   apparent stable  population
■  apparent population increase
biologically  significant population increase
■   No  Information

The  time  period  used  to  estimate trends  for most species was  1970  to present,  and the  precision
and  accuracy  of this  information vary widely.

Yellow-footed Gull         Glaucous Gull   2 Iceland Gull   z Thayer's Gull   2 Herring Gull   2  Slaty-backed Gull   2


WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   15
Information  was insufficient  to estimate  trends  for
15  percent of species.


Achieving  the  goal of sustainable  continental  pop• ulations  of waterbirds  requires  better information on population status.  Kn owledge  of population sizes  is needed  to  assess conservation risk and  pop• ulation trends,  and  to  determine  the  relative importance  of defined  geographic  areas to the  var• ious species.  Population trend  information  is important  to  assess the  effectiveness  of waterbird management prescriptions. Thus,  a continent-wide, coordinated long-term  program  to monitor  and evaluate  population sizes  and  trends  is essential.

Assessing population status  is  also a necessary  pre-     Laysan Albatrosses
liminary  step  to setting population goals.  Howev•
er, the uncertainty of global and continental population information makes goal setting at the  continental scale impossible  at this stage.  Population goals are of more value when  associated with habitat goals,  and this can best be accomplished at the regional  scale.

Population (onervation lsue and Threat onservation of waterbirds in the Americas  requires addressing  a multitude of threats  and other con• cerns,  many  of which  are shared  across the  Plan
area. Although the  details  of these  issues are too long
and complex to describe  fully here,  the following rec• ommendations  should be considered by those  planning and implementing waterbird conservation to enable coherent and coordinated actions.

The  demography of many waterbirds is such that adult mortality is the key determinant in population trends. Thus, whenever possible, threat management should be aimed  at reducing  adult mortality to levels associated with sustainable regional populations.  However,  in many cases the  only management options  available are at colony sites,  and actions  aimed  at reducing  juvenile mortality may be justified in absence  of alternatives.

Conflicts  with Fisheries
Great numbers  of ocean-feeding seabirds  are incidental• ly caught and killed by longlines, gillnets, and other gear used in fisheries  around  the world  (an occurrence
called incidental  catch or bycatch).  Beginning in the
early 1990s,  on-board observer programs  have been used to collect data  on the bycatch of specific species, and estimates  of incidental take of seabirds have been calculated for some fisheries. To date,  these  efforts have focused  on marine  fisheries in the  Pacific,  such as in the Bering Sea,  Gulf of Alaska, and Hawaiian  waters;  efforts in the Atlantic are underway.  In general,  the signifi• cance of fishery  impacts  on seabird populations  at the colony-level  has yet to be determined.   Moreover, since
1999,  changes in management of the Alaska and Hawaii fisheries  are likely resulting in dramatically reduced bycatch levels.

Fisheries can also have indirect negative effects  on waterbird populations.  Fishing levels or food-web  inter• actions can affect the  availability of prey.  Bycatch of forage fish as well as fisheries  that target the  same prey used by waterbirds may reduce  the birds'  food supplies. Trawling the  sea bottom alters the  habitat on which  the prey  of seabirds  and coastal waterbirds  depends.   Some bird populations may experience "beneficial"  impacts brought about by the presence  of offal and fish waste
as an additional food source; however,  such benefits
need  to be evaluated in terms  of possible  negative impacts from increased  likelihood of incidental take,  or heightened competition or predation resulting from unnatural population increases  of one species over another. Ultimately,  fishery  managers  should be striving to implement practices that will decrease  human impacts on waterbird populations, thus  maintaining
natural population cycles.

Lesser Black-backed Gull        Black-headed Gull           Bonaparte's Gull   2 Laughing Gull   >  Franklin's Gull


16                                                                                                                      WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
Seabirds  and other colonial waterbirds  are sometimes identified as having  adverse  effects  on marine  fisheries, but the existence  of significant economic  impacts  has seldom  been  shown  under  scientific  scrutiny.  Similarly, impacts by waterbirds  on inland  fisheries  are generally unsupported by good quantified data,  despite  percep• tions to the contrary.
❖  The  impact of fisheries  on waterbirds  should  begin to be  addressed  in all fishery  management policies  and programs.
❖  Policies similar to the U.S.  Fish and Wildlife  Service waterbird bycatch policy-that waterbird bycatch  in fisheries  is to be eliminated-should be embraced by all fisheries  management entities.
❖  Nations  conducting longline  fisheries  or in whose waters longline  fisheries  operate,  should develop  and enact national  plans of action  for reducing  bycatch  of seabirds to levels  that do not affect regional  popula• tion  size,  distribution,  or demography.
❖  Fishing nations  should  implement existing  interna• tional agreements  and enact new  agreements that require  conserving  seabird populations  as essential goals and outcomes  of all fisheries  programs.
❖  High  seas fisheries  should  be brought under  interna• tional regulation  due  to the potential of significant cumulative impacts to far-ranging  seabirds.
❖  Bycatch  reduction should be achieved  through devel• opment and deployment of multifaceted mitigating measures,  and outreach,  education,  and training pro• grams within the affected  fisheries  and consumer groups.
❖  Effective  data  collection  and monitoring programs should include  regular  reporting on mortality  due  to fisheries,  and collection  of data  on the population sta• tus  and trends  of colonies  and regional  populations  of affected species, thereby allowing for a better under• standing  of the  quantitative impacts  of fisheries.
❖  The  take  of targeted fish species  or nontarget bycatch species  eaten  by waterbirds  should not be permitted to reduce  fish stocks  to levels  incapable  of sustaining bird  populations.
❖  Fishing operations that adversely  affect sea bottom habitat that supports  prey  of seabirds  and coastal waterbirds  should  be altered to reduce  or eliminate the impact.
❖  Where  legal,  management involving deliberate killing of waterbirds to reduce  impacts  on fisheries  should occur  only on a case-by-case  basis,  and only if the
economic  impacts  are clearly proven  and the control measures  do not adversely  affect the  sustainability  of regional  bird  populations.   Given  the preponderance of technical evidence  that waterbird predation does not usually  have  significant economic  effect, the bur• den  of proof  should be on demonstrating economic harm  on a case-by-case  basis;  similarly the burden of proof  in permitting control measures  should be on demonstrating no adverse  effect on regional  sustain• ability  of affected bird  populations.
❖  Where  possible,  seabird  and other waterbird conser• vation  action  should  work  in partnership with fishery industries  and sport  anglers to effect conservation action.

Aquaculture
Aquaculture provides  artificially concentrated food supplies,  such  as crayfish,  shrimp,  catfish,  tropical aquarium fish, juvenile  trout and salmonids, baitfish, mussels,  and oysters.  In many  areas,  governments  are encouraging the development of aquaculture activities. Aquaculture can affect the  distribution and population size of waterbirds,  even on a continental  scale in that populations may shift to take  advantage  of new  food sources.  Efforts to control these birds  now being  used or proposed are the killing of adults  and juveniles  at aquaculture sites  or in colonies  and roosts  and destroy• ing eggs or young  in colonies. The  demand for control can be tremendous.  For example,  in the Southeastern U.S., 108,000  waterbirds were  legally destroyed between 1987  and  1995.  More  are probably  destroyed illegally,  increasing  the cumulative impact of aquaculture-related this mortality.  Over  the
long term,  controls  at aquaculture sites could  prove  unsustainable  for some species. Alternative techniques for reducing  real economic  impact
are available,  including  careful
site-selection,  barriers,  bird-unfriendly pond  construction,  colony  site transloca• tion,  and subsidies  to compensate  for losses.
❖  Whenever possible,  waterbird conservationists should work in partnership with the aquaculture industry to find  solutions  to con•
flicts  that assure regional  sustain•
ability of waterbird populations                                     Heron
O WALKERGOLDE

Little Gull    z Ivory  Gull    _ Ross's  Gull   2 Sabine's Gull    2 Black-legged Kittiwake     z Red-legged Kittiwake     ?


WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                           17






























Foraging wading birds


and  limit economic impacts  on  aquaculture facilities.
❖  As in the case of fishery  conflicts,  attempts to reduce local populations at aquaculture facilities should
occur  in specific, localized situations only if economic impacts are proven before  action is undertaken and control measures  are shown  to not adversely  affect
the sustainability of regional  bird  populations. Again,
the burden of proof should be on demonstrating sig• nificant economic harm  on a case-by-case basis and on demonstrating that regional  waterbird population sustainability will not be impaired. The  local and regional  effects of permitted controls must be monitored.
❖  Where legal,  permitted take of waterbirds should
occur  only after  considering the cumulative impact of all other management actions on waterbird popu• lation sustainability;  cumulative management actions should not be allowed  to adversely  affect regional population sustainability.
❖  Regulations guarding  against illegally destroying waterbirds at aquaculture sites should be enforced.
Abundant  Species  Conflicts
Waterbirds,  especially  colonial  species, have the capac• ity for rapid  population and range  changes,  especially  in response to changes  in food  availability or release  from other ecological  constraints. There  usually  is inconclu• sive evidence as to why population changes  have occurred,  as several factors are usually  in play.  It has
not been  shown  that any colonial  waterbird is now unsustainably abundant across its entire range in the Plan area,  although in local situations population abun• dance  may now  exceed  historical norms. When some waterbird populations,  particularly fish-eating species, become locally higher  than in the immediate past,
there is the potential for conflict with human activities.
In such  cases human factors,  especially  economic and social,  can come  to dominate management dialogue. Abundant species  also have the potential to affect local vegetation,  rare plants,  or other birds. Thus,  ecological factors,  too,  may be of concern,  if proven.

Abundant waterbirds need  to be managed within their social context.  Real or imagined social impact may

Gull-billed Tern      e  Caspian Tern              Royal Tern              Elegant Tern      ±    Great Crested Tern      2


18                                                                                                                         WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
require  management of social  perceptions,  as much  as the  birds  themselves,  through disclosure  of scientific findings  and public  education.  Regulations  regarding lethal control of birds  vary with country.  For example, killing of migratory  birds  is not legally allowed  in some jurisdictions,  whereas  in others  these  actions  may  be allowed  with specific  permission.
❖  Scientific findings  must form the basis of any man•
agement action on abundant waterbirds.
❖  Scientifically credible  studies of the  real economic  or ecological impact of abundant waterbirds,  as well as sociological  studies  of the perception of impact,  are needed  broadly  across the  different types  of water• bird/human conflicts.  Cases of apparent local abun• dance  leading to human conflicts  require  individual evaluation by scientifically valid means.
❖  Conflicting technical  interpretations within the  scien•
tific community need to be mediated.
❖  Alternative management actions that do not involve severe intervention should  be developed.
❖  The  demography of each abundant species should  be
thoroughly studied,  modeled and understood in order to inform  appropriate management actions, but also
to refine modeling  techniques and provide  findings  of value to other less abundant species that are more difficult to study.
❖  Perception  of the public  to abundance issues should be monitored and evaluated; social, not only biologi• cal factors,  should  be managed  by agencies responsi• ble for waterbirds.
❖  Education programs  and other communication meas•
ures should  be used to inform  the public  about man• agement decisions, including  decisions  of no-action when  economic  or ecological  impacts  are low.
❖  Where  legal,  permitted take to reduce  local water•
bird populations should  occur  only on a case-by- case basis, should be local,  and should
adhere  to the Plan's
goals of assuring regional population health  and sustain• ability.  Given the pre•
ponderance of scientific findings that abundant
waterbirds have limited economic  impact,  manage• ment action should  only be undertaken  after explicit demonstration of substantial

Double-crested  Cormorant
economic  or ecological harm.
❖  Methods of culling or control should  be carefully evaluated and relative to the  impact on the regional population.  Programs involving total colony removal or colony discouragement should be used only in very extraordinary circumstances  and only when
viable alternative colony or roost sites  are successfully
created and sustained over the long term.
❖  Where  legal,  permitted take of abundant waterbirds should  factor the  cumulative impact of all other deliberate management actions on the  sustainability of the population,  not only in the  area of possible impact but within the population's entire wintering and breeding  ranges. Waterbird mortality resulting from permitted take should  not be allowed  to adversely affect regional population sustainability.
❖ Any management action must be monitored suffi•
ciently  to detect any adverse population trend.
❖  Sustainable agriculture,  which  incorporates bird con• servation as a goal,  rather than  a challenge,  and which requires  compensation and assistance programs,
should be explored.  For example,  the development of
new aquaculture facility designs and upgrades  to existing facilities should  be encouraged through pub• lic assistance programs.

"Nuisance" Congregation Sites
Waterbirds can establish roosts and colonies in close proximity to human habitation leading to economic and natural resource  conflicts.  Lacking evidence  of
health effects,  aesthetic considerations tend  to predomi•
nate in such conflicts. Management action,  education and community engagement can sometimes turn  nui• sance sites into valued  community resources. In rare sit• uations when  control is needed  as a last option,  actions should  be mitigated and must not adversely  affect sus•
tainability of regional populations.
❖  Congregation sites used by waterbirds should not be eliminated because  of aes•
thetic or cultural conflicts  alone, but
should  be managed  for educational,  sci• entific,  and conservation purposes. Urban  sites  especially  should  be devel• oped  as educational opportunities and used to enhance  conservation of water-
birds.
❖  For demonstrable reasons of human health or natural resource  protection,  con-
© NANCY  CA MEL

Sandwich  Tern    _  Roseate  Tern     2  Common  Tern     2 Arctic Tern    _ Forster's Tern


ittle Tern
L


WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   19
gregation  site  management including  elimination or alteration may be considered.
❖  Programs  involving bird removal  or colony discour•
agement should  be used only in extraordinary cir• cumstances  and only where  no adverse effect on the local or regional  populations will occur  and viable alternative sites  are successfully  created, used and sustained.
❖   Colony  and roost sites should  be protected not only
during nesting season but also year-round,  including when  not being used by waterbirds;  destruction should be discouraged except as part of a regional management plan for the  species.
Hunting
Sport or food hunting and trapping of some species of waterbirds  are legal activities in parts of the  Plan area. In other countries,  hunting of most waterbird species is illegal. Human-induced mortality of adult  and subadult waterbirds  has the  greatest potential to depress  popula• tions; it may be possible  in local cases to hunt eggs or young birds  and not adversely  affect population stabili• ty.
❖  Hunting policy should  be based  on the  assumption that increased  adult mortality has the potential to affect population status  and trend, unless shown oth• erwise for specific populations.
❖  Hunting of adult  or subadult waterbirds should  be
carefully  regulated and monitored so as not to adversely affect regional populations.
❖  If egg and juvenile  hunting is permitted for subsis•
tence  hunting,  it should  be allowed  only if it is shown  that such mortality does not impact regional population sustainability.
❖  Where  legal hunting,  including  subsistence hunting,
is permitted,  continued monitoring and evaluation of impact is needed.
































Brown Pelicans
Disturbance
Disturbance can be due to human intrusion  on the ground, water,  or air. Examples  of disturbance are
kayaks and jet skis that allow close approach,  low flying
aircraft, pets and feral animals,  off-road  vehicles,  and other outdoor activities.  However, the ability to habitu• ate to non-intrusive disturbance is common  in water• birds,  and many waterbird colonies persist and thrive  in highly populated areas.  Research  sometimes involves purposeful disturbance to waterbirds that includes  nest disruption,  capture, banding, marking, handling,  attach• ing transmitters,  extracting blood  and so forth. These methods are necessary, but must be carried  out with care and individually  assessed as to their  conservation impact.
❖  All accessible breeding and roost sites  should be
identified to the public,  posted,  protected, patrolled and anti-disturbance policies  developed and imple• mented as needed.
❖  Additional research  is needed  on the  appropriate buffer  distances  around  colonies  or breeding sites for various waterbird species  and various types  of sites.
❖  Depending on the  colony or breeding site  and cir•
cumstances,  human intrusion  (such as for research,

Least Tern    2  Yellow-billed Tern    = Aleutian Tern    2 Gray-backed Tern   _ Bridled  Tern    z Sooty Tern   ?

20                                                       WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
monitoring,  environmental  education) is not  neces• sarily disruptive  and  may  be beneficial in enhancing the  birds'  habituation to disturbance.
❖  Intrusive,  disruptive disturbance should  be tightly
managed  and monitored by agencies responsible  for waterbirds  at all sites where  it occurs,  especially to minimize disruption of nesting,  lowered  reproductive success,  or abandonment of the breeding site.

Light Impacts
Lights in close proximity to colonies  can affect nesting waterbirds.  Squid fisheries  using lights  at
night and lights  on oil platforms  at sea attract seabirds, such as storm-petrels and murrelets. The bright lights  of coastal devel• opments can disorient waterbirds.
❖  The  effects of lights  on waterbirds need to
be better understood.
❖  Regulatory programs, to reduce  the
adverse effects of lights both on the water and on the  shore need to be developed,
implemented,  and enforced.
consideration the regional  and local sustainability and health  of all waterbird species involved.
❖  Non-lethal control of native predators  and competi• tors should  be tried  before  lethal methods  are employed.
❖  Methods that target offending  individuals  should be used in preference to more  general removal  pro• grams.
❖  Relocation of predators  should  be used only when  all
impacts  of such relocation are considered.

Predators and Competitors
At many breeding sites-beaches,  coastal islands,  seabird islands,  inland pothole regions,  and even remote Alaskan islands• mammalian and avian predators kill nesting
waterbirds,  their  eggs, and/or chicks.  In many
cases the presence  or numbers  of predators and the  ease of accessibility  to the  sites  are








Great Egret
not natural. Sometimes it is only a few individuals  that cause damage.  Competition for nesting sites may occur between abundant or between increasing  species  and other nesting species.
❖  Where  predation or competition type, level and
effect is natural,  demonstrably unaffected by human actions,  and does not adversely  affect sustainability of the  affected population,  predator control is not war• ranted; in cases when  predation is demonstrably affected by humans,  or the  effect may critically
impact a population,  control may be acceptable.
❖  Lethal predator or competitor control should  be con• sidered  only when  convincing  evidence  exists that a particular predator is having demonstrable negative impact on nesting success of vulnerable waterbird species.
❖  Control of competition for nest sites should  take into
Invasive Species
Invasive  species  can be particularly detrimental to waterbird populations and habitat,  especially  on islands. Introduced predators  can depress  or even eliminate populations. Herbivores and exotic plants can degrade habitat quality or even eliminate use of sites by water• birds.  Insects,  such as fire ants,  can kill nesting water• birds.  Others serve as disease vectors.
❖  As a general policy,  invasive exotic plants and animals
should  be eliminated from waterbird habitat.


Contamination and Eutrophication
Pesticides, fertilizers, metals, and industrial chemicals have added  large nutrient and toxic burdens to fresh• water and coastal estuaries and open  oceans, and have affected waterbird individuals  and populations.
❖  The  effects  of contaminants should  be better under-

Whiskered Tern  White-winged Tern  Black Tern  z»  Large-billed Tern        Brown  Noddy  2 Black Noddy  2


WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   21
platform construction,  drilling in wetlands  and offshore, shipping and spillage,  and chronic,  low-level seepage from surface runoff  or subsurface  sources. Waterbirds are commonly injured by oil spills,  chronic  oil discharge in bilge water,  and hazardous material releases.  Birds affected annually  can number in the hundreds  of thou•
sands in some areas. Injuries  can lead directly  to mortal•
ity or have indirect effects through habitat degradation, reduced reproductive success,  or contaminated food supplies. As upper trophic level feeders, waterbirds rely on healthy  aquatic environments to provide  the  food base necessary for reproduction,  migration and general maintenance.
❖   Oil effects  on waterbirds should  be minimized
through increased  enforcement on shipping  activities, safe operational procedures, spill clean up, and when effective,  rehabilitation of oiled birds.
❖  Every effort to eliminate threats to waterbirds should be made  in policies  for offshore  petroleum leasing
and operations. Where  threats to waterbirds cannot be eliminated,  such threats should  be mitigated.
❖  The  effects  of oiling on populations should  be better understood.
❖  Death and morbidity of waterbirds from oiling should  be monitored wherever they  occur.
❖  The  efficacy and approaches to rehabilitation  of oiled
waterbirds  should be improved and implemented where  effective.




Limpkin


stood,  especially  implications  at the population level, contamination sources, pathways to the birds,  sub• lethal effects  and synergistic  effects.
❖  Monitoring of contaminant loads  and effects in waterbirds  and maintenance of long-term data  and tissue repositories  are needed throughout the Americas.
❖   Changes  in habitat due to water quality alterations
should be avoided  or reversed  in important waterbird habitat.

Oil and Hazardous  Materials
Oil is a major  environmental threat to oceanic, coastal, and inland species,  especially  along major shipping transportation corridors.  Oil may be released  during
Debris  Ingestion and Entanglement
Waterbirds,  especially seabirds,  ingest materials and debris as a natural consequence of foraging.  Ingesting plastics  and other artificial flotsam can be detrimental. Waterbirds  are caught in discarded  fishing  line,  nets and other waste.
❖  Dumping of debris, used line,  and nets  should be pro•
hibited and the  prohibition enforced  by all authori•
ties.
❖  Existing debris posing a threat to waterbirds should be removed as possible.
❖  Widespread, internationally supported education campaigns  should  be developed and implemented to inform  ocean industries,  such  as the  cruise industry, of the need  to eliminate  ocean dumping of materials that result  in seabird  mortality.
❖  A specific international educational campaign  should be targeted at the  sport and commercial fishing
industries in order to eliminate in-water disposal of

Blue-gray Noddy   _ White Tern    _ Inca Tern   = Long-billed Murrelet    2 Dovekie    _ Common Murre    2


22                                                                                                                 WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS

persistent fishing  line,  nets  and traps.
❖  Non-persistent lines, nets and traps  should be devel•
oped.
❖  Research  on the use of lead sinkers and their  effect on waterbird mortality rates should  be undertaken and appropriate action considered.

Disease,  Natural Toxins, and Parasites
Diseases,  such as Newcastle's disease, avian cholera, algae poisoning,  and likely West Nile Virus,  affect waterbirds.  Sometimes  die-offs  of unknown causes may occur, such as in the  Salton  Sea. Waterbirds may harbor human pathogens,  such as tick-borne diseases.
❖  Habitat management should be undertaken in ways
to avoid the  occurrence of avian diseases.
❖  The  human health  effects  of waterbird concentra•
tions  should be studied in particular situations.
❖  Human health  issues should  be resolved  by assuring human avoidance  of waterbird sites,  rather than destruction of waterbird habitat.
peie (onernation tatu

he conservation status  of 166 species of seabirds  and other colonial waterbirds utilizing habitats in the Plan area was assessed (see Table 2 and Appendix
1).  Expert assessment of the  conservation status of 44 solitary-nesting waterbirds will be presented in subse• quent versions  of the  Plan.

In brief, the process  for assigning colonial waterbirds to categories  of conservation concern  followed  a protocol adapted from those  used by Partners in Flight and the U.S.  Shorebird Conservation Plan that considers  vulner• ability to population loss due to population trend, abundance, threats and distribution (See Appendix 2). The protocol for colonial  species  also accommodates
the special conservation issues of species that aggregate
during the breeding season and/or utilize extensive marine  habitats.  Over  150 ornithologists  and wildlife managers  contributed to the  development of the  Plan's
conservation status  assessment protocol  and species



































Royal Tern colony





WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   23
TABLE 1.  Conservation  Status and Distribution  of Colonial Waterbirds

CATEGORY  OF                                                                                                        DISTRIBUTION'
CONSERVATION     North America                       Western                          Northern                         Cosmopolitan                      Peripheral
CONCERN "                                                                                    Hemisphere                   Hemisphere
Highly                 Ashy Storm-Petrel            Black-capped Petrel             Black-footed                         Audubon's  Shearwater        Phoenix Petrels
Imperiled            Newell's Shearwater         Hawaiian Petrel                      Albatross                            Band-rumped                       Tahiti Petrels
Townsend's  Shearwater                                                                                                  Storm-Petrel                      Polynesian Storm-Petrel

High Concern    Bermuda Petrel                 Bare-throated                       Aleutian Tern                       Arctic Tern                           Herald Petrels
Black-vented                        Tiger-Heron'                      Ancient Murrelet                 Bridled Tern                         Little Gull
Shearwater                      Black Skimmer                     Laysan Albatross                  Brown Booby                       Little Tern
Brandt's Cormorant           Black Storm-Petrel               Marbled Murrelet                 Gull-billed Tern
Craveri's Murrelet             Blue-footed Booby               Pelagic Cormorant                Masked Booby
Kittlitz's Murrelet             Blue-gray Noddy                  Red-faced Cormorant          Red-billed Tropicbird
Least Storm-Petrel            Christmas Shearwater         Red-legged Kittiwake          Red-footed Booby
Xantus's Murrelet             Greater Shearwater°            Ross's Gull                           Roseate Tern
Jabiru                                    Short-tailed Albatross         White-tailed Tropicbird
Least Tern
Little Blue Heron
Magnificent Frigatebird
Pink-footed Shearwater
Snail Kite
Snowy Egret
Tricolored Heron
Wood Stork

Moderate            American White               Anhinga                                Bonin Petrel                         Black-crowned                     Black-headed Gull
Concern                Pelican                            Bonaparte's Gull'                 Common  Murre                     Night-Heron                      Great Crested Tern
California Gull                  Brown Pelican                      Crested Auklet                     Black Tern                            Juan Fernandez Petrels
Cassin's Auklet                  Elegant Tern                         Dovekie                                Black Noddy                        Lesser Black-backed
Forster's Tern                    Franklin's Gull                     Great Skua°                          Bulwer's Petrel                       Gull° Heermann's Gull              Gray-backed Tern                Horned Puffin                      Cory's Shearwater'
Western Grebe                  Neotropic Cormorant          Ivory Gull                            Eared Grebe
Yellow-footed Gull           Reddish Egret                      Least Auklet                         Great Cormorant
Roseate Spoonbill                Northern  Fulmar                 Great Frigatebird
White Ibis                             Pigeon Guillemot                 Manx Shearwater
Yellow-crowned                   Razorbill                              Red-tailed Tropicbird
Night-Heron'                    Thayer's  Gull                       Royal Tern
Thick-billed Murre              Sooty Shearwater
Tristram's Storm-Petrel       Sooty Tern
Whiskered Auklet                South Polar Skua°
White Tern

Low Concern     Clark's Grebe                    White-faced  Ibis                   Glaucous-winged  Gull        Caspian Tern                        White-necked Green Heron                                                                   Iceland Gull                         Common Tern                         Petrels Western Gull                                                                  Parakeet Auklet                    Flesh-footed Shearwater
Rhinoceros Auklet               Glossy Ibis
Tufted Puffin                       Greater Flamingo'
Herring Gull
Leach's Storm-Petrel
Long-tailed Jaeger
Parasitic Jaeger
Pomarine Jaeger
Sabine's Gull
Wedge-rumped
Storm-Petrels
Wedge-tailed Shearwater

Not                      Double-crested                Great Blue Heron                Atlantic Puffin                     Brown Noddy                      Buller's Shearwater
Currently              Cormorant                       Laughing Gull                      Black Guillemot                   Cattle Egret                         Cook's Petrels
At Risk               Ring-billed Gull                Northern  Gannet                 Black-legged Kittiwake        Great Egret                          Short-tailed
Fork-tailed Storm-Petrel      Mew Gull                                Shearwater
Glaucous Gull                     Sandwich Tern
Great Black-backed Gull    Wilson's Storm-Petrels

Information                                                   Agami Heron                                                                                                                   Capped Heron
Lacking                                                         Boat-billed Heron                                                                                                           Cocoi Heron
Fasciated Tiger-Heron                                                                                                     Kermadec Petrel
Green Ibis                                                                                                                        Lesser Frigatebird° Rufescent Tiger-Heron                                                                                                    Mottled Petrel
Striated Heron                                                                                                                 Nazca Booby" Scarlet Ibis
Slaty-backed Gull Western Reef-Heron White-winged  Petrel

Xantus's Murrelet           Craveri's Murrelet          Ancient Murrelet    2 Cassin's Auklet    _ Parakeet Auklet    2      7
24                                                                                                                  WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
Table z footnote

a Categories of Conservation Concern  are defined  as:

Highly  Imperiled:  Species with significant population declines  and either  low  populations  or some  other high  risk factor.

High  Concern:  Species  that are not Highly  Imperiled.  Pop•
ulations  known  or thought to be  declining  and have  some other known  or potential threat as well.
fl6UR[ 4: Conservation  Status of Colonial
Waterbird Species

Moderate  Concern:  Species  that are not Highly  Imperiled or  High  Concern.  Populations  are either  a) declining  with moderate threats  or distributions;  b) stable with known  or potential threats  and moderate to  restricted distributions;  or c) relatively  small with  relatively  restricted  distributions.

Low Concern:  Species  that  are not Highly  Imperiled,  High Concern or Moderate  Concern.  Populations  are either a) stable  with  moderate threats  and  distributions; b) increasing but  with known  or potential threats  and moderate  to restricted distributions;  or c) of moderate size with known
or potential threats  and moderate to restricted distributions.






■ Highly  Imperiled
■ High  Concern
■ Moderate Concern






■  Low Concern
Not  Currently at Risk
■ No Information

Not  Currently  at Risk:  all other  species  for which  informa•
tion  was available.

Information Lacking:  inadequate information available  to assess risk.

b Distribution categories  are broadly defined  as:

North  America:  Includes  all species  that breed  and winter only in North America  as defined  in  the  Plan.

Western  Hemisphere:  Includes  all species  that breed  and winter in North America  and South America and associated oceanic  regions.

Northern  Hemisphere:  Includes  all species,  except those included in the  above  categories,  that  breed  and winter in the  Northern Hemisphere and  associated  oceanic  regions.

Cosmopolitan:  Includes  all species  that  breed  and winter in most  hemispheres including North America and associated oceanic  regions.

Peripheral:  Includes  all species  that occur  largely  outside of North America but with breeding and/or  non-breeding ranges that overlap  peripherally with North America  and associated  oceanic  regions.

c Species  does  not breed  in the Plan area.

d  Species  fits into  a range  of categories  because  of a missing factor score  (see  Appendix 1).   Species  is shown  in the concern  category  of greatest vulnerability.
information base. The  full details  of the  methods  and results  may be found  in a companion publication 1.

As  a result  of the  conservation status  assessment,
species are classified in one of five categories  indicating the  level of conservation concern.The relative responsi• bility and importance of conservation planning  efforts
in the  Plan area to global biodiversity vary by species.
Thus, to make  concern  categories more  meaningful, species are also categorized by distribution. Twenty-two species of waterbirds  considered in the  Plan are limited to the  Plan area.The  others  included in the  Plan range into  South America  or other continents  of the North• ern Hemisphere;  some have worldwide distributions  or occur largely outside of the  Plan area. Taken together, the conservation concern  and distribution categories allow prioritization of conservation strategies.

Figure 4 shows that of the  166  species of colonial waterbirds  assessed in the  Plan area,  7 percent are high• ly imperiled and another 26 percent are of high con• cern.  Of greatest concern  are many species of island• nesting seabirds with limited breeding  distributions  and whose  populations have declined  in part due to intro• duced  predators. These  species  are particularly vulnera• ble,  as they  lay a single egg per breeding  season,  and may require  five to eight months to incubate, hatch
and raise their  nestling to independence.


Crested Auklet  Whiskered Auklet  2 Least Auklet        Rhinocerous Auklet        Atlantic Pufif  n  _ Horned Puffin  2


WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   25

Genera  of greatest  concern  include  Phoebastria (alba• trosses),  Oceanodroma (storm-petrels), Puffinus  (shear• waters),  and Pterodroma  (petrels). Also of concern  are Sula (boobies),  Brachyramphus and Synthliboramphus (murrelets), Phaethon  (tropicbirds), Phalacrocorax  (cor• morants), Egretta (egrets),  and Stera  (terns).  Genera with most species of low or no current concern  include Larus  (gulls), Plegadis (ibises), Fratercula (puffins), Ardea  (herons)  and Stercorarius (jaegers).


FIGURE 5: Nesting  Location  of Colonial Waterbirds


60

50

4
8   40
0
VJ
4-,      30
d
0
<     20
•0
10

0
llabitat lleed

he habitat needs  of waterbirds include  places to nest, feed,  roost,  or loaf (rest).  By definition,  these species depend on aquatic habitats for some portion
of their  lives.


Nesting habitat is critical.  Colonial  species gather together to nest,  while  the nests  of solitary breeders  are dispersed  across suitable habitat.The  placement of
nests  and nesting location varies with species,  as does
flexibility in the placement of nests. Normally, the loca• tion of nests provides  relative isolation from predators, such as on islands, cliffs, swamps  or summits  (see Figure
5). More than  half of colonial  waterbirds require  islands for colony-sites. Nearly  three-quarters  of seabirds  and other colonial species are nest-site  specialists with rela• tively inflexible  habitat requirements. Nest-sites used
by colonial  waterbird species include  trees/shrubs, open
ground  (e.g., grass, sand, tundra), marshes, burrows, crevices,  and ledges (see Figure 6).  Nesting activity may affect the  qualities of a site over time.  For example,  the presence  of a nesting colony may cause changes  in a site's vegetation.  Likewise,  changes in vegetation may
affect site  suitability for nesting.  Sand-nesting terns,  for
Inland
Wetlands
Estuarine
Islands/ Wetlands
Rocky
Shoreline/ Cliffs
Offshore/
Oceanic
Islands
example, prefer  nesting sites regularly  reconfigured or swept free of vegetation by storms.

Waterbirds feed in nearly  any and all aquatic habitats. The  foraging habitat needs  of each particular species,


FIGURE  b:  Nest Placement of Colonial  Waterbirds



50
FIGURE  7:  Foraging Habitats  of Colonial  Waterbirds



50

40
Q)

0
VJ      30
4-,
0
d
Q)
<
±
10
40
zQ)
V•J      30
4-,
0
d
Q)
<
±
10

0
I
Tree/     Ground    Marsh    Burrow   Crevice    Ledge shrub
0
Pelagic      Shelf       Near-      Estuar-     Fresh-    Upland
Shore         ine         water


Tufted  Pufif  n       Snail Kite        Least Grebe        Pied-billed Grebe  _ Red-necked Grebe        Horned  Grebe        Eared Grebe


26                                                        WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
however,  can be quite  specific.  Foraging habitats for colonial  species  are shown  in Figure  7.  Nearly  half for• age in offshore  marine  habitats including  shelf waters
or open  ocean.  Over  100  species  utilize freshwater and
estuarine wetlands.  Sixty  percent use more  than  one aquatic habitat. Waterbirds  nest within commuting dis• tance of feeding  sites.  Some species,  including  some marshbirds,  may feed  only in territories  around  their nest.  Colonial  waterbirds flying to feeding  sites  may travel  short distances  (Black Guillemots tend to feed within one to four  kilometers)  or
undertake long com•
mutes  (herons  may
feed  20-30  kilometers  a way,  while  some petrels  and albatrosses fly hundreds  of kilometers to feed).  Because  commuting distances to foraging  grounds  from  nest• ing areas differ between species, the amount and quality
of habitat required
range of activities,  including  but not limited to drainage,  forestry practices,  agriculture,  aquaculture, pollution,  disturbance,  and development for residential or industrial purposes.  In the case of colonial  nesters,  a surprising  number of breeding sites  are on artificial habitat,  such  as spoil islands,  dikes,  bridges  and cause• ways,  fill,  even rooftops,  and these  sites  often  require
management or maintenance to
remain  useful to waterbirds.
Colonies  may change  char•
acter over time due  to veg• etation death or succession, often  caused  by the birds themselves.
❖ As a management tool,  active
and potential  colony  sites  and nest• ing habitats  should  be inventoried in each  country and region. A
matrix of used  and potential•
ly used breeding sites
throughout the nest•
ing season vary.
Great  Blue
Heron
O WALKERGOLDER
should be maintained across each regional
landscape  and used  for site
Assessing habitat use  and requirements is a necessary preliminary step  to establishing  habitat goals that can translate  into  actual habitat  acreage  on the ground. However,  goal setting  at the continental scale  is not possible  at this stage.  Habitat goals must first be estab• lished  at regional  and local scales,  and then extrapolat• ed to the  continental scale.  Habitat goals will be  estab• lished  on a regional  basis as part of regional  waterbird planning  efforts.
llabitat (onernation sue and Threat

t is because  of the diversity  of habitat needs  among waterbirds  that conservation  action  should  emphasize protection  and management of all available  aquatic
habitats. Those  sites  and  areas found  to be of particular importance to waterbirds,  already subject and con• ducive  to active management,  or containing vulnerable species  should be the highest priorities.

Nesting Habitat Concerns
Where  the  availability  of nesting habitat is a limiting factor to populations,  protection and usually  manage• ment of this  habitat are essential to sustaining  healthy
populations.  Nesting  habitat can be  destroyed by a
and regional  planning  to assure sufficient breeding habitat availability.
❖  Public  and private  agency managers  responsible for waterbird  conservation  should  maintain  or enhance the  quality of important or selected breeding sites using manipulations,  as needed and appropriate,  such as vegetation  or substrate  alterations  or predator  con• trol,  including  the  control of other waterbirds  on a case-by-case  basis. The  results  of management actions at breeding sites  should be monitored,  and actions revised  as appropriate.
❖  The  need  for alternative breeding sites  should  be
determined on a regional  basis,  and where  appropri• ate,  habitat or sites  should  be established  or re-estab• lished. The  importance  of human-made nesting  sites to waterbirds within a region  should  not be underes• timated.  In most areas  such  sites  need  to be protect• ed and managed.

Commercial interests  can adversely  affect waterbirds' breeding  sites.  Guano  mining  at islands  in Mexico  and in Latin America,  for example,  can adversely  affect seabirds.
❖  The  effects  on colonial  waterbirds  of guano  mining
and other industries  need  to be understood  in each

Western Grebe    2  Clark's  Grebe   = Red-billed Tropicbird          Red-tailed Tropicbird    2 White-tailed Tropicbird    =

WATERBIRD   CONSERVATION   FOR THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                            27
















cot\OLA,AR8IN
ENTR<Y PROHIBITED
APRIL1- ALGUST
Wintering,  migrating,  and other non-nesting habitats are critical to the  long-term conserva• tion  of waterbirds.  Presently, there  is little information on habitat needs  outside of the breeding season for many  species,  particularly during  migration.
❖ Waterbird conservation strategies should
establish monitoring programs  during  the non-breeding season,  targeting habitat use away from  the  nesting sites.  Information from these  programs  will assist in identify• ing, preserving, and managing  habitats that provide  suitable sites for migrating,  foraging, roosting,  as well as breeding waterbirds.
❖  Because habitat used by migrating water birds is poorly understood,  surveys and inventories of migration habitat use should
be undertaken.





White Ibises  in flight over Battery Island Sanctuary


case and the  activity should be wisely managed for sustainability of waterbird populations.

Availability  of foraging habitats is also vital to the reproductive efforts of waterbirds.
❖  Conservation planning  for nesting habitat must also include  associated foraging habitat.
❖  Feeding  sites and the  distances traveled  to reach
them  must be understood for each species,  and a net•
work  of feeding  situations secured and managed.

Non-Nesting Habitat  Concerns
Seabirds  and other colonial  waterbirds often  congregate throughout the year. In non-nesting seasons, they  gather at roosts  and loafing areas. These  sites require both pro• tection and management to maintain their  value to waterbirds.
❖  Roost and loafing sites should be inventoried and monitored on a regional  basis,  and those  that are used over a number of years may merit consideration for acquisition.
❖  Disturbance to roost and loafing sites should  be mini•
mized  using all available  management tools.
Reduction  in Habitat  Quality
Aquatic habitats, wetlands especially,  are sub• ject to significant physical  and chemical modi- fications from  water management,  dredging, ditching,  siltation, runoff, and introduction of
invasive plant species-modifications that destroy or degrade  habitat for waterbirds. Remaining natural wet• lands  need  to be preserved,  protected,  and actively managed to retain their  ecological  functions. The needs of waterbirds should  be integrated into strategies for all wetland management and mitigation programs.
❖  Since waterbird use of wetlands is variable  by nature,
regulators permitting wetland changes  should  evalu• ate waterbird use on a case-by-case  basis on time scales spanning  both annual  and multi-year hydrolog• ic cycles.
❖  In the U.S., Canada,  and Mexico, wetland conserva•
tion projects funded under  the  North American Wet•
land Conservation Act should include  consideration of waterbirds,  and rules for wetland projects  should be further refined to support waterbird conservation.
❖  Farm programs,  such as the U.S. Wetland Reserve
Program, should  be used to benefit waterbirds.


Throughout the Americas,  one of the  most common issues relating to wetland alteration is water manage• ment.  Management of natural  and artificial wetlands for purposes of water supply, flood control,  vegetation
management, fish production or even management of


Northern Gannet   2  Blue-footed Booby    _ Peruvian Booby          Masked Booby    _ Nazca Booby   D


28                                                       WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
other aquatic birds  can  affect suitability  for waterbirds.
❖ Waterbird conservation should  be an explicit goal of water managers, whatever their  other principal goals. For example,  allocation of water supplies should include  conservation allocation that is of benefit to waterbirds.

Human-created aquatic habitats, such as islands, reser• voirs,  dammed rivers,  artificial wetlands, rice fields,  and aquaculture facilities provide  important habitat for waterbirds. At some sites,  such as man-made islands
and peninsulas adjacent to Canadian cities on the  Great
Lakes,  aquaculture facilities in Louisiana,  and reservoirs in the western and southeastern U.S., waterbird popula• tions have become dependent on artificial habitats.  On the  other hand,  artificial wetlands-now created widely for mitigation-have seldom  proven  to be as productive as natural wetlands.
❖  The  role of artificial habitats in the  sustainability of
waterbirds should  be understood in different land•
scapes.
❖  The  success of wetland mitigation programs should be assessed and reported to assure meeting of man• agement goals for waterbirds.
❖  Where they  support waterbirds,  artificial habitats should  be managed appropriately. Where needed, subsidies  should  be provided to continue manage• ment practices that benefit waterbirds.

Coastal zone policies  and practices associated with land-use  and development,  coastal protection,  water quality, dredging, resource  extraction including sport and commercial fisheries,  and distur•
bance  can significantly affect the  abil• ity of coasts  and intertidal waters to sustain waterbirds.
❖  Coastal zone management policies should  include  sustainability of waterbird populations as a goal, including  conservation of feeding, nesting,  and roosting sites for resi• dent,  migratory and wintering waterbirds. This requires  that the
effects  of policies be understood      #
and that a commitment to sustain-   8,
able waterbird populations underlie
Open,  sandy beach  habitats  are particularly subject to disturbance. Nesting, foraging,  and loafing waterbirds may be adversely  impacted by bathers,  runners and walkers,  off-road  vehicles,  and anglers on beaches.
Beach sites used by waterbirds need  to be identified
and managed by responsible authorities.  Management might include  site protection,  appropriate sand and vegetation manipulations,  closures  and enforcement, predator control,  and monitoring.

Dredging  along the  coasts,  such  as for ship  and boat channels,  can be used to create and enhance  nesting and roosting sites for waterbirds. Beach restoration projects can similarly benefit nesting birds, or can
adversely impact their  habitat,  including from contami•
nated sediment.
❖  Maintenance,  establishment,  and enhancement of waterbird habitat using dredged  materials need  to be explicitly  treated as a priority by all agencies  con• ducting dredging  projects in order  to enhance bene• fits to waterbirds while  avoiding  conflicts with other users.
❖  Planning  for beach  replenishment and dredge  dispos•
al operations should be coordinated at a regional level and be consistent with wetland protection and enhancement efforts nationally and regionally.
❖  Created sites require  continued management,  and this should  be the  primary responsibility of the organization creating the habitat.

The location and design of potentially attractive facili•
ties such as airports, landfills, municipal wastewater wetlands,  can be critical to future bird-human interactions,  including health  and safety issues.
❖  Plans for such facilities should be
designed  to minimize or eliminate human conflicts  and impacts to regional  waterbird populations.

Climate  Change
Sea level is rising along mainland and island coastal areas.  Climate change also affects rainfall patterns and resulting wetland hydrology  in interi•
or areas. These  changes  affect habitat
all actions taken by government,       olr"a
industry and citizens.                              Black Skimmer

availability and ultimately the  season•
al timing  of nesting and migration.

Red-footed Booby          Brown Booby           Anhinga    z Brandt's Cormorant    2 Neotropic Cormorant    2


WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   29
❖   Conservation planning  needs to take into considera• tion the  long-term inevitability of climate change in establishing reserves, and securing nesting and feed• ing sites that will function under  future conditions.
❖  The  effects  of climate  change  on normal  ocean cycles
and sea ice formation need  to be determined or bet•
ter understood.

Key Site for Waterbird

aterbird populations may come to depend on spe• cific areas and sites for their  stability.  Coloniality or congregatory behavior-gathering in colonies,
roosts  and feeding  areas-result in discrete sites sup•
porting sizable portions of local or wider  populations at some time  during  the year. Waterbirds are also localized by specialized habitat require•
ments for nesting and/or for feeding, resulting  in these  habi• tats  and sites being critically important for population health and sustainability.

A variety of site classification systems already exist through• out the Plan area,  some of which already confer protection to birds, for example,  Migratory Birds Sanctuaries and National Wildlife  Areas in Canada, National Wildlife  Refuges or Marine  Protected Areas in the U.S.  or lands in the  National System of Protected Areas (Sis• tema Nacional  de Areas Prote• gidas) in Mexico.  Other systems identify sites  in order  to engen•
der management attention or
serve as candidates  for protect-   5
ed areas. These  sites and areas     E
need to be recognized for all      @ll species  and at all scales,  and            Pied-billed Grebe such sites need  to be managed
in a way to protect their  value for waterbirds.

The  Important Bird Areas  (IBAs) initiative is a good example  of a program  that recognizes  and supports
sites  of importance for all birds. Waterbird conservation
planners  should focus on ensuring  that IBA programs are well developed in the  Plan area and assist in the protection  and management of sites that are identified as important to waterbirds. The IBA program  is detailed below.

Important Bird Areas Program


Program  Structure
Sites  are identified as IBAs through the  application of criteria based  on numbers  and types  of birds. The  IBA identification process  provides  a data-driven means  for cataloging the most important sites for birds, prioritiz• ing projects,  and allocating limited resources. The  IBA program  engages a variety of partners, such as citizens, landowners,  and public  and private  organizations,
throughout the process.  In
addition to identification,  the process  might include  monitor• ing,  habitat restoration,  site stewardship,  advocacy,  and fundraising.  The identification of an IBA is therefore a start• ing point for site-based conser• vation efforts.

The  IBA program  was initiated by BirdLife International in Europe  in the  1980s,  and is supported by partners around the world.  BirdLife  Interna• tional  has partners for much  of the Plan area.  In Canada, BirdLife's  partners include  Bird Studies  Canada  and the  Cana• dian Nature Federation.
BirdLife  International's partner in the U.S. is the National Audubon Society. American Bird Conservancy has also developed a list of IBAs, some of which  are important for waterbirds. In Mexico,
CIPAMEX  is the BirdLife International partner.  [In Mexico  and other Spanish-speaking countries,  IBAs are known  as Areas de lmportancia para la Conservacin
de las Aves (AICAs).]  In the  Caribbean and Central
America,  BirdLife International partners  are active in a


Double-crested Cormorant       Great  Cormorant        Red-faced Cormorant        Pelagic Cormorant       Reddish Egret


30                                                                                                       WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
number of nations  and  projects to identify  IB As  are underway.

Criteria
Based on the  criteria developed by BirdLife International,  an IBA must maintain  and support one
or more  of the following:  species
of concern  (e.g., threatened and    g

endangered species);  restricted-     8 range species (vulnerable because  3
they  are not widely  distributed);   %
species that are vulnerable                Horned Puffins
because  their  populations  are con-
centrated in one general habitat type  or biome; or indi• vidual species or groups  of similar species that are vul• nerable  because  they  occur  at high densities due to their congregative behavior. While  all criteria  apply to waterbirds,  some  are particularly important for species that inherently congregate in specific  habitats  and sites.

To further establish priorities for conservation efforts, sites identified as IBAs are classified with regard  to their  overall significance in a hierarchical fashion•
global, continental, national,  and state/provincial.  Glob• al significance  is determined by internationally consis• tent criteria set forth by BirdLife International.  Sub• global criteria  are structured by the partner organiza-



Criteria for IBAs of Global Significance


❖  The  site regularly  holds significant numbers of a species that is a globally threatened species or a species of global conservation concern.

❖  The  site supports  significant populations of an endemic  or restricted-range species.
tion  to be most appropriate for the particular planning  region.

IBAs and the Plan
The  IBA programs  existing with• in the  Plan area will be used to inform  the  Plan and as a vehicle for implementing site-based con• servation. These  programs  are at different stages of development. The  IBA program  in Canada  has essentially concluded much  of its identification activities at the global and national level,  and is
focusing  on site management and protection.  In the U.S., the National Audubon Society has agreed to sup• port the  Plan by identifying waterbird IBAs.  Mexico has indicated that their  primary  National Bird Conservation Strategy in Mexico focuses on the AICA program. BirdLife International  and its national partners  are identifying and facilitating conservation at IBAs in Cen• tral America  and the  Caribbean.

Other Key Sites
The IBA Program,  as described  in the previous  section, utilizes  a strict set of criteria to identify sites. Waterbird conservation at the regional  or local level requires  iden• tification and management of sites that, while not qual• ifying as IBAs,  are critical to local populations. These sites  might be recognized based  on factors such as
social or educational value,  intrinsic aesthetic value,
economic  value  (ecotourism),  or simply professional judgment.  If desirable,  conservation planners and man• agers are encouraged to target such sites for conserva• tion activities.  In some instances,  a state or provincial program  might also identify these  sites  as IBAs through the  application of their  own criteria.

❖  The  site is known  or thought to hold a significant assemblage  of the  species whose  distributions are largely or wholly  confined to one biome.

❖  The  site supports  > 1 %  of a biogeographic popula• tion of a waterbird species,  or > 1 %  of the  global population of a seabird or the  site  supports,  on a regular basis,  >20,000  waterbirds  or >10,000  pairs
of seabirds  of one or more  species.

Links to IBA Programs:


Canada: www.bsc-eoc.org, www.cnf.ca

U.S.: www.audubon.org/bird/iba

Mexico:  www.iztacala.unam.mx/cipamex

In the Americas:  www.birdlife.net

Tricolored Heron  » Little Blue Heron         Little Egret        Western Reef-Heron         Snowy Egret        Chinese Egret  2


WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   31
Inventory and Monitoring

onitoring waterbird populations and habitats across the  continent is required to determine conservation status,  detect population trends,  assess health of
habitats,  and indicate whether environmental changes and management prescriptions are affecting waterbirds. Populations of some waterbirds have been  counted for decades  and for some  groups  of birds in specific loca• tions,  considerable long-term information is available. However, most waterbirds, if monitored at all, have been surveyed by various  parties using different methodologies over multiple scales, resulting  in data sets that are very difficult  to compare.

In many  cases, data are lacking altogether. Especially  in Mexico, the  Caribbean, Central America, and northern Canada, limited information is available  concerning use of sites for nesting,  roosting,  and feeding. Information
on waterbird populations using migration hot spots  and key wintering areas is lacking for all of North America, Central America and the  Caribbean.  Information on seabird  by-catch associated with commercial fisheries  is needed. Monitoring cryptic waterbird species requires special development. This lack of information hinders our abilities to manage  and evaluate populations throughout their  ranges.  Our  ability to refine waterbird conservation planning  and evaluate management

























Least Tern

actions at multiple geographic scales is dependent on a coordinated continental system of inventory and moni• toring programs  and a centrally managed repository for waterbird data.

Central to creating this system and repository is the establishment of an alliance in which  participants agree to use comparable techniques and contribute their data.The National Bird Population Data  Center at U.S. Geological  Survey,  Patuxent Wildlife Research  Center (USGS  Patuxent), through their  Waterbird Monitoring Partnership, is working  to accommodate groups  collect• ing waterbird data throughout the  continent by central• izing the  storage of and access to waterbird monitoring data.  Centralized storage and access will allow the Waterbird initiative to identify gaps in survey informa• tion,  assess how well conservation strategies are work• ing, test key assumptions,  and implement adaptive management prescriptions. The  goals of the Waterbird Monitoring Partnership include  centralizing data stor• age and management,  developing standardized census methods,  developing statistically valid and logistically feasible  waterbird sampling  schemes  tied  to hypothesis• driven monitoring programs,  developing standardized models  for analyses of waterbird data,  and identifying and filling in gaps in continental waterbird monitoring programs.

Centralized  Data Storage and Access
The  National Bird Population Data  Center has already  developed a data repository to archive data on waterbirds throughout their  ranges, regardless  of survey locality or survey method. This centralized database is publicly  accessible and allows managers  to submit and retrieve data over the  World Wide Web  (www.mp2• pwrc.usgs.gov/cwb/). Ultimately, it will be linked  to other databases covering  specific bird groups  or regions  of the  Plan area, such as the Pacific Seabird  Database and data  collected by the  International Waterbird Census  of Wet• lands International.

5  Standard Methodologies
8  Large scale monitoring programs must use
techniques that permit population and habitat
u     data collected in different locations  and across multiple geographic or temporal scales to be
Capped Heron  ~ Gray Heron          Great  Blue Heron   ~ Cocoi Heron           Great  Egret         Cattle  Egret   ~ Striated Heron   1

32                                                                                                                 WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
compared and  combined. A specific need  is the  ability to  sample  at large scales using  various  methods  and
still  meet trend  detection goals.  Set• ting  up  and testing monitoring methods  and  then  evaluating their precision and  power  to  detect  trends are crucial  for effective conservation.

USGS  Patuxent, through the  Water• bird  Monitoring Partnership,  will work  with all waterbird  partners  to
develop  a manual of recommended   ?
standardized population monitoring   j
methodologies having sufficiently       Ina.Mi.iii...mi"
low bias to be useful  in trend  analy-     Magnificent Frigatebird
sis. To assist with integrating bird
establishing other programs  in these areas.

The Waterbird Monitoring Partner• ship will address the paucity  of information on waterbird habitat needs  outside of the breeding season by developing  nonbreeding surveys that focus on important wintering habitats,  including  pelagic foraging areas for seabirds.  One  critical task
of the Waterbird Monitoring Partner•
ship is to establish a mid-winter cen• sus (to include  shorebirds  and water• fo'wl  as waell as waterbirids) linkedlto the International Waterbird Census
being conducted by Wetlands Inter•
conservation across the  continent at other geographic scales,  every effort must be made  to develop  spatially explicit criteria for use in a common GIS-based system. The Waterbird Monitoring Partnership will help  to cre• ate an a priori  sampling  design to provide  sufficient coverage  during  the breeding and non-breeding seasons, allow merging  of data  among  surveys,  and allow statisti• cal inferences to be made.

Monitoring  Goal
The monitoring goal of the  Plan is to be able to detect greater than  50% change  over  l O  years or 3 genera• tions. This goal mirrors  one proposed by the World Conservation Union  in their  criteria for identification of species at risk.

Filling the Gaps
With a data repository and standard methodologies in place, partners will be able to identify gaps in current population survey efforts and coordinate an integrated network of statistically valid,  bias controlled,  long-term, waterbird population monitoring programs throughout the  Plan area.

Monitoring programs  should track populations of waterbirds  at the  regional  scale as well as the  continen• tal scale. In particular, basic inventories of waterbird colony  sites and nesting habitats in Mexico,  Central America,  and the  Caribbean nations should  be con• ducted.  Determining relative abundance and species
composition is the  first step in identifying IBAs and
national for the  RAMSAR Bureau  in Europe, Africa, Asia,  and South America.  For many  countries,  lack of resources  dictate that censuses include  as many species as can be accommodated by a census technique. The Waterbird Monitoring Partnership will work with other bird initiatives to implement a mid-winter waterbird census incorporating all waterbirds.  If such a census is successfully  implemented in North America,  Central America,  and the  Caribbean,  global population esti• mates will be available for all waterbirds.

There  is a need  for demographic information (e.g. reproductive success,  adult mortality)  on particular populations and for particular species.  Comprehensive monitoring programs should  include  a demographic component. The Waterbird Monitoring Partnership will help partners develop  sampling  frameworks,  and within these  frameworks, identify particular sites for collecting demographic data.

Habitats,  as well as populations, have to be monitored, thus  waterbird monitoring efforts should  include  a habitat component.  Habitat data  and analyses must be robust enough  to allow correlation with population trends  at many scales. Where the potential exists,  inte• gration with existing habitat monitoring programs or those  developed for other bird  groups  will be pursued. Monitoring programs focusing  on other aspects of waterbird biology  or on environmental factors, for example contaminants and disease,  should be included
in monitoring schemes  as appropriate.


Green Heron  D Agami Heron   _ Yellow-crowned Night-Heron  _ Black-crowned Night-Heron   _ Boat-billed Heron    ?


WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   33
Scientific Information feed

onservation of waterbirds in the Americas  requires  a sound  scientific basis. Much  is known  about the  con• servation biology of waterbirds, but much  remains  to
be understood.  Below is an evaluation of the  priority research  needs for waterbird conservation.  Many of these  needs  are discussed  elsewhere in the  Plan; they are repeated here to encourage recognition by the research  community.

Species,  Populations,  and Habitat Information Understanding genetic and demographic population structure is essential to formulating proper conservation schemes.  For example, priorities depend on knowing whether particular subspecies  or genetically identifiable populations are threatened,  or distinguishing which populations are sources or sinks. Additional study, through banding  and modeling,  is needed to further waterbird population biology.
Comparative population trend analyses from different
geographical regions will provide  important insights into the  relative effect of human-induced perturba• tions.  Once  a threshold for action is determined,  assess• ments of trend significance can guide the  management of these  effects.

The  degree  to which  populations show high fidelity to certain sites for breeding,  during  migration,  or in winter is an important knowledge gap in conservation planning at present.  Research  into the  key features that provide consistently high habitat quality is also needed.

Management-oriented Research
Additional information is needed on the  population effects  of several key threats  and concerns.  Research should  be conducted on all of the  following  topics  to ameliorate related negative impacts:
❖  Importance of hunting as a source  of mortality to waterbirds
❖  Role of commercial fisheries  in seabird  mortality
❖  Importance of aquaculture facilities as a food base for waterbirds where  natural habitat displacement has occurred
❖  Population-level significance of killing waterbirds
near  aquaculture facilities
❖  Methods to reduce  the  real and apparent impacts  of certain waterbirds in urban  and suburban landscapes

❖  Better predator control and eradication methods  at colony sites
❖  Impact of different types  of human disturbance, including researchers, on nesting success in colonies
❖  Determining population level effects of contaminants including oil on waterbirds  at the  population level
❖  How manipulations of habitats,  including wetland
creation and restoration,  marsh  management,  irriga• tion modification,  impoundment management, increase  attractiveness to waterbirds
❖  Adaptive resource management approaches to restore nesting habitat for rare or declining  species.

Ecosystem  and Large-scale Issues
The  role that waterbirds play in their  respective ecosys• tems-in energy and nutrient flow,  or in affecting prey species dynamics, for example-is  little known  in most situations.  In particular,  information is lacking on how habitat and energy needs  change  for long distance migrants,  as they  move  among  high,  mid and low lati• tudes,  and the  degree  to which  fish populations are coupled to waterbird populations remains  largely unknown.

Research  is needed on the  effects  of global weather changes.  Major  changes  in ocean  regimes  occur  in short cycles that are somewhat predictable in frequency as well as on longer  (multidecadal)  scales. Aquatic prey availability is correlated with these  changes,  and evi• dence  is beginning to emerge  that population changes of some seabirds  may be associated with these  regime shifts.  Better understanding is needed of the  role of



Banding is an essential tool in the  study of water• bird populations and demography. Band returns give insight on population demography and distribution, thus  research  and monitoring using banded water• birds should  be encouraged.  Banding training  mod• ules need  to be developed,  and training  and certifi• cation of those  banding waterbirds must be initiat• ed.  Band quality should  be improved and saltwater• resistant bands  need  to become available.  Banding data repositories must be redesigned to deal with long-lived  waterbirds that are re-banded numerous times  during  their  life. Many historic databases exist which  must be conserved.  The use of radio and
satellite telemetry should  also be increased.


Bare-throated Tiger-Heron  2 Fasciated Tiger-Heron        Rufescent Tiger-Heron  2 Yellow Bittern  2 Least Bittern


34                                                                                                                 WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
cyclical  oceanic  changes  in seabird  sus•
tainability.


Changing  weather patterns  can be expected  to  influence  habitat  use  by coastal  species  (e.g., shifts  due  to rising sea levels),  but the  vulnerabilities  of
other habitats  in the  Plan  area have  not been studied  in detail.  For example,  it  is    3 not known  precisely  how  changes  in rain- E
fall and temperature patterns might          [
O
affect waterbirds in interior wetlands.
Based on the  data that do exist,  conserva-
















American Bittern
tion,  perhaps adverse public  perception of a few abundant fish-eating species could be reversed. Waterbird conserva• tion  should  become part of the  citizen• ry's environmental consciousness,  and community-based organizations,  commit• ted to waterbird conservation are essen• tial. In addition to the  general  public, natural resource  decision  makers  and educators are particularly important audiences  for waterbird conservation information.
tion  of all waterbirds must take into account the  need for populations to accommodate long-term cycles and large-scale  changes.

(ommunication,  [ducation, and Public Awarena

he dissemination of information is an essential  com• ponent of waterbird conservation. Waterbirds live in a world  increasingly  dominated by humans.  For
many  and perhaps most species, their  survival can be
assured  only with public  awareness  of their  existence and public  support for measures that protect them  and their  habitats.

Fortunately, many waterbirds,  due to their  visibility and beauty, can easily garner  positive public  attention and support.  It also allows them  to serve as effective teach• ing tools.  Congregatory behavior can further enhance these  advantages. For example,  colony and roost sites may be excellent venues  for education and advocacy programs,  such as colony  adoption programs  and inter• pretive displays at viewing  points. The publicity
enjoyed  by many  waterbirds allows them  to serve as
ambassadors for all aquatic birds.


A public  in support of waterbirds and properly informed on conservation issues represents a huge reservoir  of potential supporters,  volunteers and advo• cates. They  can assist with monitoring of colonies  and roosting areas to assess populations and prevent distur• bance; work with local parks,  refuges,  and agencies to improve management of colonies  and wetland habitats; and seek adoption of appropriate legislation at every level to better protect waterbirds and their  habitats. With the  dissemination of scientifically valid informa-
An abundance of environmental outreach programs already exists. Therefore,  a waterbird conservation com• munication program should involve the  development and fostering of partnerships in order  to incorporate waterbird conservation into existing programs  as well as develop  new, targeted projects. A Waterbird Communi• cation and Outreach Coordinator-most likely an indi• vidual  associated with an NGO-should be designated to facilitate information sharing  and oversee the  forma• tion  and implementation of waterbird education and public  awareness  activities.

Education and awareness  activities may take a variety of forms  and provide  a diversity of experiences. The steps in development of any outreach program are:
❖  Identify priority target audiences, recognizing that
priority audiences  will differ  in various  regions,  espe•
cially in different countries.
❖  Determine critical messages.
❖  Identify sources  of information.
❖  Develop  strategies for reaching  priority audiences, especially  using existing programs.
❖  Develop  or identify model  education and outreach materials to incorporate into local programs.
❖  Develop  information and dialogue  exchange  mecha•
nisms,  especially  on the  Internet.
❖  Evaluate results  and adapt approaches as necessary.


In general,  emphasis  should  be on local programs where individuals  have the  opportunity to have their  lives changed  by personal  experiences with waterbirds.


1    Parsons et al., in prep. North American Conservation Assessment for Waterbirds,  A Waterbird Conservation for the  Americas
Report.
American Bittern    _ Pinnated Bittern   2 Greater Flamingo    = White Ibis            Scarlet Ibis   2 Glossy  Ibis    2

WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   35
40 ldeafor Waterbird (oneration Outreach Projet

1     Internet based  chat rooms  for information sharing and interaction between waterbird educators
2  Partnerships and communication networks, such as sister-site programs,  among important waterbird areas
3}       Internet accessible repository of technical  informa•
tion  and educational resource  material
4  Training  workshops  for waterbird education special•
ists and waterbird managers
5   Graduate studies  and research  in waterbird conser•
vation
b   Boat tours  around  seabird  nesting islands led by trained  interpretive naturalists

]  In-class school  outreach sessions with hands-on activities
8   Classroom  and public  field trips to waterbird nesting habitats
Placement of spotting scopes in observation blinds at appropriate nesting colonies  or installed at mainland vantage points near waterbird areas
10 Guided public  tours  at selected waterbird colonies on boardwalks or beaches
11   Adopt-a-Colony and Adopt-a-Wetland projects

12 Adopt-a-Waterbird programs  (individual  birds)
1 Internet real time  video cameras  focused  on nest sites
14 Internet-based curricula  associated with video cameras
1K  Waterbird web pages or colony web pages
b Waterbird festivals or special "waterbird days" to celebrate the return of migrants or the  nesting season
17 Teacher  workshops  to teach  hands-on  activities
1& Dramatic presentations about waterbirds using costumes or puppets
10 Town meetings to role play values about waterbirds
20 Roadside  signs about waterbirds  at pullouts or other vantage points near colonies
21 Kiosks about waterbirds near viewing areas
22Audio  components to kiosks playing waterbird sounds  at viewing sites
22 Waterbird Centers- theme-oriented nature centers
that celebrate waterbird biology and conservation

24Books, brochures  and video productions featuring local waterbirds
26 Postcards
2b Calendars
2] Other waterbird merchandise (shopping  bags,
t-shirts, jewelry  etc.)  with informational hangtags
28 Posters  and other signs to educate anglers about recycling fishing line,  overhead casting and cleaning up baited hooks and lures
20Birding trails booklets featuring waterbird sites
0Volunteer programs  (e.g., Earthwatch) that connect serious birders  with researchers
l Internships for biology college students with
researchers
2 Workshops  on waterbird management for agencies, IBA managers,  and others with responsibility for waterbirds.
3} Workshops for fishing party boat operators to pro• vide instruction on removal  of hooks from acciden• tally snagged birds,  and to reemphasize the impor• tance of proper  disposal of fishing line and nets.
4Beach  cleanups  to collect plastics,  especially cigarette lighters, crumbly  Styrofoam and six-pack holders
36 Training for beached bird  surveys  and oiled bird rescues
b Identification and labeling of storm drains that lead
to wetlands
3] Decoration of building  walls and fences with murals celebrating local waterbirds
28 Larger than  life, free-standing statues  or other  art•
work of local waterbirds for parks and public  places

Help in identifying,  protecting and teaching about a local IBA or key site for waterbirds
0Campaigns  against the  release  of balloons  that can settle in aquatic habitats  and choke wildlife


White-faced Ibis       Buf-f necked Ibis  2 Green Ibis  Roseate Spoonbill  American White Pelican       Brown Pelican  =r


36                                                       WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
PART3


MOVING I0AWARD through  PARINER/IPS


eveloping and relying on an integrated network of partners is a key strategy for successfully  planning and implementing conservation action for water•
birds.  No single institution or person  can accomplish all
that is required and partnerships at all levels will be a driving force. The  Plan was created from the  input of numerous parties,  and continued planning and imple• mentation will follow the  approach of collaboration and partnership.

International Waterbird (onervation

The Waterbird Conservation  Council
Continued planning  and facilitation of waterbird con• servation at the  continental scale will fall to the Water• bird  Conservation Council  (the Council),  successor  to the  Plan's  Steering Committee. The  Council  will be the keeper  of the  Plan and have responsibility for coordi•
nating,  supporting,  and communicating implementation
of this  and other waterbird plans, updating the plans, and facilitating actions for waterbird conservation throughout the  Plan area.

Specifically,  the  Council  will have the  following  respon•
sibilities:
❖  Be the  sponsor  of the  Plan document,  overseeing  its dissemination and revision.This  includes  publication of Version  2 by 2004,  and reviews  at least every five years thereafter to facilitate the  adaptive approach advocated by the  Plan
❖  Conduct planning  and implementation at the  conti•
nental scale and facilitate conservation at all levels, from continental to local
❖  Identify implementing agencies,  entities and individu• als, and through interactions, interventions,  and col• laborations, leverage  opportunities for waterbird con• servation
❖  Facilitate the  acquisition of resources  to support

.._       .       t.


























Common Murres





WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   37
waterbird conservation throughout the Plan area
❖  As invited,  select or nominate representa•
tives to various  committees and councils
❖  Promote and support work  of regional working  groups
❖  Interact with other bird  conservation initia•
tives,  habitat Joint Ventures  (JVs), provinces/states,  national governments, local interests,  and others
❖  Facilitate and support the Waterbird Moni•
toring Partnership
❖  Facilitate and support the meeting of scien•
tific information needs
❖  Facilitate and support the waterbird conser• vation communication program combining communication,  education and public awareness  activities
❖  Maintain the Plan's  home  page                          American White Pelicans
❖  Assure  coordination of the Plan with other
international bird  conservation programs and initia•
tives
❖  Periodically evaluate if goals of the Plan are being met,  and modify  plans  and activities accordingly
❖  Recruit new members to the Council.


Council membership will be recruited to represent all of the interests and stakeholders involved in waterbird conservation. Together,  councilors will provide perspec• tives that cover:
❖  The  geographical extent of the Plan area
❖  Taxonomic groups  of birds included in the Plan
❖  The  range  of habitats in the Plan area
❖   Species  and resource management
❖   Communication and outreach
❖  Monitoring


And include representatives of:
❖  Political entities
❖  Non-governmental organizations
❖  Research and scientific organizations
❖   Other stakeholders


The  Council is an independent,  self-perpetuating non• governmental organization and will not be part of any governmental agency or single non-governmental organization. The  Council will select its own members,
based  on recommendations,  nominations and approvals
obtained from participating stakeholder groups  and organizations. Appointments will be for staggered, renewable three-year terms. The  Council will develop its terms of reference,  appoint committees and working groups  as needed and select its  Chair. An Executive
Committee will be appointed to allow rapid  action and
continuous engagement in conservation issues.

Waterbird Monitoring  Partnership
The Waterbird Monitoring Partnership was discussed  in Part  2.The  Council will facilitate the development of this partnership with USGS  Patuxent. Via the Water• bird  Monitoring Partnership, monitoring will be carried out across the plan  area by a multi-national array of partners,  including provincial,  state,  national and local governments,  non-governmental organizations,  and vol• unteers. Where possible, monitoring efforts for water• birds  will be linked  to efforts for other bird  groups.

Waterbird  Conservation  Communication Program The  need  for organized communication and outreach activities was also discussed  in Part 2. A Waterbird Communication and Outreach Coordinator will con• sult with the Council to articulate and promote a com• munication strategy integrating existing programs. As with monitoring efforts, waterbird conservation com• munication,  education and public  awareness will be a
cooperative effort by numerous partners.

Red-throated Loon  _ Arctic Loon   _ Pacific Loon  _ Common Loon         Yellow-billed Loon   » Northern Fulmar  Dr


38                                                       WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
North American  Bird Conservation  Initiative and
Other International Partnerships
Within Canada,  Mexico,  and the U.S., implementation of the Plan will be accomplished to the extent possible and appropriate within the structure and philosophy of NABCI.The Plan has adopted NABCI  BCRs and relat• ed PBCRs as its basic planning units.  Plan representa• tives will participate in NABCI  activities as invited,  and serve as members of committees and subcommittees,  as needed.

Continental implementation requires cooperation and coordination beyond,  as well as within,  the artificial boundaries of the Plan.  There  are many  international partnerships that benefit waterbird conservation and with which  the Plan should link,  especially  associated with conservation in the Asian and Central Pacific, Bering Sea,  and circumpolar Arctic areas. Alliances  with national and international conservation entities in
South America should also be fostered.

National Waterbird (oneration

lanning and implementing waterbird conservation on the national level is crucial  to the success of waterbird conservation.  However,  the exact strategy
taken to work  towards national conservation will vary among  countries, depending on the governmental struc• ture and conservation entities within the country and the availability of resources. Flexibility in how  countries both plan  and implement waterbird conservation is a desirable  part of the multinational Waterbird Initiative. National planning,  for example, may be the responsibil• ity of biological  staff of the national wildlife or natural resource agency,  a non-governmen-
tal organization (NGO),  or a
combination of national stake• holders brought together for the purpose.

National plans  and strategies can be important and valu• able options in national scale conservation. Frameworks
for national waterbird con•
servation are presently developed for Canada,  Mexi• co,  and the U.S. as discussed
below.  Other nations will be taking other approaches to planning and implementing waterbird conservation that they find  appropriate.  It is hoped that national strate• gies will,  to the extent possible,  take into consideration and be mutually consistent with the continental Plan.

There  are many  potential elements of a national water•
bird  conservation strategy:
❖  A national waterbird conservation plan  or strategy, including an assessment of species  conservation status using the continental-scale status assessment as a starting point
❖  A national waterbird coordinator,  a professional biol•
ogist preferably in a national agency
❖  A national inventory of waterbird colonies  and breeding sites,  important roost sites,  and feeding  areas linked  to other national inventories
❖  A national monitoring scheme  for waterbirds and their habitats linked  to other national schemes  via partnerships
❖  Summary of available  information on waterbirds and
their habitats
❖  Identification and management of key sites for water• birds,  including IBAs in partnership with BirdLife International
❖  Identification and management of important habitats
❖  Ongoing inventory of information gaps
❖  A system for technical assistance to national agency staff and other stakeholders in waterbird conservation
❖  Nationally coordinated communication strategy, link• ing education and public  awareness  programs featur• ing waterbird conservation
❖  Communication network among  waterbird stake•
holders  in the country.

Canada
Within Canada, waterbird conservation will be organ• ized and facilitated through a National Waterbird Working Group in conjunction with NABCI  Canada
Council.  Canada  is preparing a national plan for the
conservation of all waterbirds entitled Wings  Over
Water1,  through a partnership of national, provincial and territorial wildlife agencies,  environmental
NGOs,  and other specialists. Developed concurrent- ly with the continental Plan, the two plans are


Arctic Tern
© WALKERGOLDER

Tahiti Petrel          Fiji Petrel   _ Black-winged Petrel   _ White-necked Petrel   2 Mottled Petrel   _ Bonin Petrel   2


WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   39
and Upland Game  Bird Working Group,  and Bird Con• servation Committee. The  Shorebird and Waterbird Working Group has as its particular charge  the support
of the Waterbird initiative.















Dredged  Sand Island


consistent in goals and approach. Additional planning will occur  at regional  levels with coordinated implemen• tation at appropriate levels. As work  evolves there
should be increasing  opportunities for broader continen•
tal planning  and implementation.

An important element of waterbird conservation in Canada  is the NABCI  goal to integrate bird  conserva• tion  across species  groups  and national boundaries. Cross-border integration for areas that encompass parts
of the U.S. and Canada  will occur  first in joint planning
regions  where  there are species and issues of common concern. Most implementation will occur  at regional and local levels with various  partners and will include evaluation to ensure  appropriate results  and national consistency.

United States
In the U.S., bird  conservation is a partnership among local,  state,  and federal  agencies  and NGOs. A distinct U.S. waterbird conservation plan will not be developed, since finer-scale regional  and state strategies will be used to deliver  on-the-ground conservation.

State governments are a principal force  in waterbird conservation; coordination among  state governments occurs  through the International Association of Fish
and Wildlife Agencies  (IAFWA).  Representatives of the
Waterbird initiative will participate in the committee system organized by IAFWA, particularly the Shorebird and Waterbird Working Group, the Migratory Shore
Desirable state roles and actions include:
❖   Creating a state waterbird conservation strategy, using the continental Plan as a starting point, which
includes  population and habitat goals
❖  Maintaining an inventory of waterbird nesting sites and important nonbreeding habitats
❖  Assisting in identifying and managing important areas for waterbirds
❖  Monitoring waterbirds and their habitats in coopera•
tion  with other parties through the Waterbird Moni•
toring Partnership at USGS  Patuxent
❖   Continuing colony  site protection and management programs
❖  Providing  technical assistance to other stakeholders in
waterbird conservation
❖   Supporting education and awareness programs focus•
ing on waterbird conservation
❖  Participating in the continent-wide communication network, and defining research and monitoring and other information needs

As stated above,  each  state is urged  to create a water• bird  conservation strategy and to appoint a member of their technical staff to have primary responsibility for the waterbird strategy within the state. This staff person would be responsible within the state for overseeing waterbird inventory and monitoring,  protecting colony/breeding and feeding  areas, identifying priority research needs,  identifying Important Bird Areas,  and implementing other conservation measures for water• birds within the state.

States should encourage and support local conservation efforts on behalf of waterbirds. The  state coordinators are encouraged to participate in JVs within their boundaries and facilitate the sharing  of data with national data management networks.  Each state is encouraged to organize and/or conduct a monitoring program for waterbird populations and,  as reasonable, habitat and demographic parameters within the state. The  monitoring program should follow the protocols of this plan  and participate in the continental data man•
agement program.

White-winged Petrel    2  Cook's Petrel     =  Stejneger's Petrel             Phoenix Petrel    2  Herald Petrel   2

40                                                                                                                 WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS

Each  state  is encouraged to  carry  out an environmental education program that reaches  into the  school  system, teaching the  conservation of waterbirds  in ways  appro• priate for the  region.  Each  state  is  encouraged to set  up a mechanism to facilitate  communication and  support from  individuals  and  organizations  monitoring,  manag• ing,  and protecting waterbird sites.

Management of migratory birds  is also the  responsibility of numerous  federal  agencies,  especially  the  U.S.  Fish
and Wildlife Service.  Migratory birds  are also a focus  of
many  NGOs,  whose  activities  include  advocacy,  educa• tion,  research,  fund-raising,  and habitat  acquisition. The facilitation  of the  partnership  of states,  federal  entities, and  NGOs is  also a goal of the NABCI  U.S.  Committee.

Mexico
In Mexico, waterbird conservation will be focused  on planning  and conservation action at AICAs. Waterbird planning  and implementation in Mexico  will occur under  the  auspices  of the  NABCI  Mexico  Council, with the  important involvement of international  and
national NGOs.  It is hoped that in planning  and imple•
mentation, Mexico  will take into consideration and be mutually consistent with the  continental  Plan,  where possible.

Countries ofthe Caribbean  and Central America
In the  Caribbean and Central America,  planning efforts should  identify the  resources  necessary  in each nation
to make waterbird conservation a priority. The conti•
nental waterbird conserva•
tion community should
share responsibility in assist•
ing to secure  these resources.  It is recommend• ed that countries develop national waterbird strategies and plans, incorporating all species  of birds using aquat• ic habitats.  It is hoped that
in each country at least a part-time position be desig• nated to lead the  national waterbird conservation program.

Laughing Gull
Regional Waterbird (onervation

onservation action in many  cases is most effectively planned and carried  out on a regional  basis with spe• cial consideration to both political realities and eco•
logical zones. The  strategies  and goals set forth on the continental scale by the  Plan must be supplemented by more  precise goals set at subcontinental scales. To carry out regional  planning,  sixteen waterbird conservation planning  regions have been  established that together cover the  Plan area.  The  Plan also recognizes  the  criti• cal role played  by Habitat Joint Ventures (JVs), estab• lished regional  entities formed  under  the  North Ameri• can Waterfowl Management Plan in Canada, the U.S. and parts of Mexico. JVs are positioned to perform on• the-ground habitat protection and restoration,  and they are expanding beyond  the  traditional focus on water• fowl. The relationships among  regional  planning  and implementation units are shown  in Table 3. This infor• mation will be modified as regional  working  groups refine or adjust their  boundaries and compile  regional data.

Habitat Joint Ventures
JVs  consist of voluntary organizational  and agency part• ners working together to conserve  bird habitat,  espe• cially wetlands  of importance to waterfowl. JVs set habitat goals and mobilize partners to achieve  these goals.  Since wetlands  are important to other aquatic birds,  integration of the  habitat needs  of waterbirds into JV planning  and implementation is important for
waterbird conservation. Every effort should be made to identify areas of overlap between habitat needs  for various bird groups.

The  Plan suggests that each JV include  strategies for waterbird conservation and undertake explicit planning, habitat and population goal setting, habitat acquisition and protection,  and manage• ment for waterbirds.  Some JVs have already begun  this process.  Specifically, they  are
urged  to protect and manage


Hawaiian Petrel   2 Kermadec Petrel   2 Juan Fernandez Petrel   2 Murphy's Petrel   2 Bermuda Petrel   2


WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   41
TABLE 3.  The Relationship  of Waterbird Planning Regions  to Other Planning and Implementation Units







Alaska/Bering/Yukon     Alaska,  British Columbia, Yukon              1,2,3  (Alaska  and               68,69,  70                                 None
Territory, Northwest  Territories                 Yukon only) 4

Pacific Coast                   Yukon,Alaska,  British Columbia,              5,32                                  71                                               Pacific Coast, Washington,  Oregon,California,                                                                                                               Central Valley Habitat, Baja California                                                                                                                                           San Francisco Bay
Mexico•                          California,  Nevada,Arizona,                      33,34,  35,38,  39, 40,     71,72,  73,74                         Sonoran Desert
Southwest U.S               New Mexico, Texas, Aguascalientes,          41,42,  43,44,  45, 46,
Baja California,  Baja California Sur,          47,48,  49,50,  51, 52,
Campeche,  Chiapas,  Chihuahua,               53,54,  55,56,  57, 58,
Coahuila,  Colima,Distrito  Federal,           59,60,  61,62,  63, Durango,  Guerrero,  Guanajuato,               64,65,  66
Hidalgo, Jalisco, M~xico, Michoac~n, Morelos, Nayarit, Nuevo Le~n, Oaxaca,  Puebla,Quer~taro,  Quintana Roo,  Sinaloa,  San Luis Potosi, Sonora, Tabasco, Tamaulipas, Tlaxcala, Veracruz, Yucat~n,Zacatecas

lntermountain West       Idaho, Utah,Nevada,  Colorado,                 9,10,  15,  16                         None                                         lntermountain British Arizona,  New Mexico, Wyoming,                                                                                                              Columbia,lntermountain British  Columbia,Alberta                                                                                                                         West,  Sonoran Desert

Boreal                              Northwest  Territories, Alberta,                  6,7,  8                                   75                                              None
Saskatchewan, Manitoba,  Ontario, Quebec, Newfoundland,  Nunavut,
St.  Pierre et Miquelon  (France)

Arctic Canada                Northwest  Territories,  Nunavut,                3 (except Alaska                  76,84,  85                                 None
Quebec, Newfoundland                              and Yukon)

Northern  Prairie and     Alberta,  Saskatchewan,Manitoba,             11                                                     None                                         Prairie Habitat, Parkland                         Montana,North  Dakota,  South                                                                                                                Prairie Pothole
Dakota,  Minnesota,lowa

Central Prairies              Montana, Wyoming,  Colorado,                  17,18,  19                             None                                         Playa Lakes,  NE Rainwater New Mexico, Texas, North Dakota,                                                                                                          Basin,Northern  Great South Dakota,  Nebraska,Kansas,                                                                                                              Plains
Oklahoma

Upper Mississippi          Manitoba,  Ontario,  Quebec,                       12,13,  22,23,  24                None                                         Upper Mississippi Valley
Valley/Great Lakes        Minnesota, Illinois, Kansas,                                                                                                                        and Great Lakes Region, Wisconsin,Indiana, Oklahoma,                                                                                                                 Central Hardwoods,
Michigan,  lowa,Arkansas,  Ohio,                                                                                                               Eastern Habitat, Nebraska,Missouri,Alabama,                                                                                                                   Atlantic Coast Tennessee,  New York,  Kentucky,
Vermont, Pennsylvania

Southeast U.S                Texas,  Oklahoma, Mississippi,                    20,21, 25,26,  27,               74,77                                         Atlantic  Coast,Lower Kentucky, Arkansas, Missouri,                    28,29,  31,36,  37                                                                  Mississippi Valley, Tennessee,  Louisiana, North Carolina,                                                                                                      Gulf Coast
Virginia,  Maryland, Ohio, Pennsylvania, New York,  South  Carolina,Alabama, Florida, West Virginia,Georgia

Mid Atlantic/ New England/ Maritimes



Pacific Islands

Delaware, Rhode Island, Vermont,            14,30
New Jersey,  Maryland,New  York,
Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts,
New Hampshire,  New Brunswick, Nova Scotia,Prince  Edward  Island,
Quebec

Hawaii,American    Samoa,Northern         67
Mariana Islands, Marshall Islands, Federated  States  of Micronesia,Baker
and Howland Islands, Commonwealth of Guam, Jarvis Island, Johnston Atoll, Cocos, Kingman Reef, Midway Atoll,

78,79                                         Eastern Habitat, Atlantic Coast




80                                              None
Palmyra Atoll, Wake Island

Black-capped Petrel   e  Bulwer's Petrel   2 Jouanin's Petrel           Parkinson's Petrel    2 Cory's  Shearwater    2


42                                                                                                                  WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS






Caribbean                           Bermuda,Bahamas,  Jamaica,Cuba,           n/a Haiti,Dominican   Republic, Anguilla, Antigua  & Barbuda,St.Kitts  & Nevis, Dominica,St.Lucia,St. Vincent & the Grenadines,  Barbados,  Granada,
Trinidad & Tobago, the Dutch islands of  Aruba, Bonaire,  Curacao,  Saba, St.Eustatius, and St  Maarten,the French islands of Martinique, Guadeloupe,  St.Martin,  and St.Barthelemy, the British islands of Turks & Caicos,  Caymans, British Virgin Islands,  and Montserrat, the
U.S. islands of Puerto Rico, U.S. Virgin Islands,  and Navassa,and  the Venezuelan  islands in the Caribbean

Central America             Guatemala, Belize, Honduras,                   n/a
EI  Salvador,Nicaragua,Costa  Rica,
Panama
81                                                      None













72                                             None

Pacific                             n/a                                                              n/a                                         82

Atlantic                           n/a                                                              n/a                                         83

• Subject to change as regional plans  are developed.
b  See Figure 2.

None

None


nesting and roosting sites located within and near important waterbird feeding  habitats. The  Plan urges JVs to create mechanisms,  such as waterbird advisory committees, to bring together all local partners in aquatic bird  conservation for waterbird conservation
goal setting within the context of goals for other aquat• ic species. JVs and other regional  partners are urged  to engage waterbird specialists with responsibilities for developing and carrying  out conservation strategies and for working  with regional  waterbird working  groups  to formulate population and habitat goals and implemen• tation projects.  Regional  waterbird working  groups  will assist JVs in implementing projects by providing expertise and perspective on the needs  of waterbirds in the region.

Waterbird Conservation  Planning Regions
The  waterbird planning regions  are shown in Figure  1. Regional  plans  will step  down  the goals of the conti• nental Plan to smaller  scales,  and it is expected that regional  waterbird conservation plans  will identify pri• ority species, habitat and species goals, IBAs,  and priori• tize implementation projects for its composite units.
Regional  conservation plans  will be developed first for
those regions  that have the knowledge and expertise base sufficient for planning. Many, but not all of the waterbird planning regions  already  have voluntary regional  working groups  dedicated to producing a com• prehensive plan.  Other regions  have groups  planning
for some  subset of species  or a particular geographic











- «









Sandhill Cranes


Streaked Shearwater    s Wedge-tailed  Shearwater    2 Buller's Shearwater    2 Flesh-footed Shearwater    2


WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   43
ble  with multiple bird  conservation initiatives. Regional  working  groups  should  also consider  special populations  or subspecies  when  determining  priority species  within the  region  as appropriate.  Regional planning  efforts  should  include  solitary  nesting water• birds  (e.g., marshbirds) from  the  onset along  with
colonial-nesting  waterbirds.










American White Pelican


area within the  region-efforts that will hopefully be merged  into a comprehensive plan  in the  future.  Final• ly, some regions,  such as the  Boreal,  Arctic Canada, Central Atlantic,  and Central Pacific, will need  further consideration by partners to clarify how planning  will proceed.

As discussed  previously, the regions include  land-based planning units and/or pelagic  areas established to enable conservation planning for seabirds. BCRs and PBCRs are visualized  as the  principal way to plan waterbird conservation within the  context of all bird habitat conservation. It should  be noted that the  Plan does not view planning units such  as BCRs  and PBCRs
as being implementation units, with independent struc• ture  or staff. Implementation should  draw on many units,  including, but not limited to,  political entities at every scale,  and partnership-based implementation bodies.

The  distribution of waterbird species in the  planning units is shown in Appendix 3.  In order  to categorize the  conservation status of species  occurring in their region, regional  working  groups  will implement a process  appropriate to their  needs. The continental colonial  breeding species status data  are available to each  working  group  (Appendix  l).These  data,  along
with a consideration of the  importance of a geographic
area to the  continental population,  can be used to determine regional  species conservation status. Where possible,  approaches should  be used that are compati-
Regional  working  groups  should also identify key sites for waterbirds in their  region.  Specifically,  it is expected that groups  will compile  information that would  allow an assessment of key sites against IBA criteria at global,  continental,  and/or national levels of significance, drawing  on the  criteria identified by IBA Programs  in relevant countries. Additionally,  in the U.S., National Audubon Society will partner with relevant regional  waterbird working  groups  to identify
state-level IBAs.  Key sites that do not meet IBA criteria may also be identified within a region,  and regional working  groups  will take these  sites into account in planning and conservation action.

Alaska/Bering/ukon Y
This region includes  large interior portions of Canada's western provinces,  all of Alaska to the  tip of the  1,100 mile Aleutian Chain,  as well as the  surrounding pelagic areas. It is characterized by a wide  diversity  of physical features, including  open  ocean,  seaside cliffs,  coastal plains  and tundra,  mountain ranges,  and diverse forest. The  region's  extensive coastlines  and nutrient rich waters host some of the  largest seabird  colonies  in the world, including those  of the  Black-legged  Kittiwake, Common Murre,  and Pelagic Cormorant. In summer, the world's  populations of breeding Red-legged  Kitti• wake,  Least Auklet,  and Whiskered Auklet are found here,  and Southern Hemisphere albatrosses and petrels forage offshore.  Inland  are found  tremendously large, undisturbed areas inhabited by a small suite of water• birds  such  as loons and cranes. All of the bird  species found  in this region benefit from the  extended oppor• tunities to feed  and reproduce during  the  region's
long-sometimes continual-periods of summer day• light.  Despite low-density human populations, the region's  waterbirds face a number of human-related threats,  including introduced predators,  fisheries  mor• tality,  oil spills and other contamination,  global climate change  affecting ice and ocean  regimes,  and develop•
ment for lumber, mining,  and oil exploration.


Pink-footed Shearwater    D  Greater Shearwater           Sooty Shearwater    _ Short-tailed Shearwater    2


44                                                                                                                 WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
Pacific  Coast
The Pacific Coast region stretches from the Kenai Peninsula  in Alaska through British  Columbia and Cali• fornia coasts to include  the northern portion of Baja California.  Its diverse habitats include  the  coastlines
and highly productive offshore  marine  areas, the largely coniferous  coastal rainforests of its northern half,  low coastal mountains  of mixed  chaparral vegetation towards the south,  and the  wetlands  and lowlands  of the expansive  Central Valley of California.  Each of
these  habitats hosts  an array of waterbird species  sub•
ject to varying threats. The northern coastlines include large proportions  of the  global breeding populations of a number waterbirds including  Ancient Murrelet, Cassin's Auklet,  Rhinoceros  Auklet,  Glaucous-winged Gull,  and Leach's  Storm-Petrel, while rocky islands off
the  southern coast support many  or most of the world's
breeding Ashy Storm-Petrel, Brandt's Cormorant, West• ern Gull  and Xantus's Murrelet.The region's  pelagic waters provide  habitat for large numbers  of shearwa• ters, storm-petrels,  alcids,  and albatrosses. The major threats to these  coastal and pelagic species include introduced mammalian predators, bycatch in fisheries operations, contaminants,  oiling, climate change,  and lack of formal protection for several key breeding colonies  and their  associated marine  foraging areas. The threats to Marbled  Murrelets from timber  harvest in
the  coastal rainforests  are well known  but this activity also impacts the waterbirds utilizing the  associated river deltas  and pockets  of wetlands. Much  of the depressional wetland and riparian  habitats of the  Cen•
tral Valley,  lying between the  coastal  and Sierra Nevada mountain ranges,  have been  lost to agriculture and
other development, but large populations of waterbirds breed  and winter here. The southern marshes  and beaches  of the  region provide  critical habitat for endan• gered populations  of Clapper  Rail and Least Tern.
These  habitats  are threatened by development,  as are
all habitats in this rapidly  developing  region. Because of the tremendous diversity  of populations, habitats,  and threats,  planning  in the  Pacific Coast region will be multi-faceted, including  on-going scientific study, moni•
toring, management,  education and outreach.




























Green Heron
Mexico-Southwest U.S.
The  Mexico  region includes  all of Mexico's  lands,  ocean waters and islands,  as well as dry,  often mountainous portions of southern California,  Nevada,Arizona,  New Mexico  and Texas. From its northern edge, the region makes  a transition from a temperate to tropical  climate, and mountain ranges running  almost the  length of the region  define  the interior regions that separate the Pacific and Atlantic coastal plains. The region's  complex topography results  in a diverse array of aquatic habitats and waterbird species,  and often  localized  bird distribu• tions. The Mexican  islands in the Pacific,  Gulf of Mexi• co,  and Caribbean  (the  Campeche Bank) support important seabird and coastal waterbird breeding colonies.  Pacific offshore waters host non-breeding pelagic species,  notably those  ranging from their  nesting islands in central and south Pacific,  and the  Gulf of Mexico  provides  foraging habitat for both locally nest• ing seabirds  and wintering migrants.  On the mainland, shallow bays, mangroves,  coastal lagoons,  and marshes
frequented by wading birds  are scattered along the

I Christmas Shearwater    )!/"   Manx Shearwater              Newell's Shearwater     )!/"   Townsend's Shearwater     )!/"


WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   45
Pacific coast.  On  the  Atlantic slope,  the  remaining man• grove-fringed lagoon  complexes  provide  nesting  areas and migratory bird  wintering  areas,  and the  low-lying area from  southern  Veracruz  to the  boundary with
Belize  offers  extensive freshwater marshes  and  lagoons, hosting large colonies  of wading  waterbirds. The
lagoons  stretch  to the  north coast  of the  Yucatan,  while
the  Yu catan's  southern  coasts  are sparsely  occupied by coastal  species  in winter. Important waterbird habitats in the  region's  interior include  interior  river  drainages,
the  Salton  Sea,  lakes on the  Mexican  Plateau,  and  Cen• tral Volcanic  Belt marshes,  all providing  refuge  in an otherwise  arid landscape.

The  Mexico  region's  waterbirds  and  their  habitats  face numerous  threats  directly and  indirectly resulting  from human activity.  In Mexico,  conservationists  are particu• larly challenged  by  a lack of information and  resources, yet can draw  on  an emerging  environmental  awareness. Moreover,  the  network of Mexican  AICAs  provides  a strong  foundation from  which  to launch  waterbird con• servation  in concert with conservation action for other aquatic species. As  discussed  previously,  it  is envisioned that the  NABCI  Mexico  Council  will  oversee  waterbird conservation planning  and  implementation in Mexico, working  with planners  in the  U.S.  portions  of the
region.

Intermountain West
The lntermountain West Region,  as its name  implies,  is bounded by the  Sierra Nevada  and Cascade  mountains on the west,  and the  Rocky Mountains on the  east.  It includes  the  extensive Great Basin,  Columbia Basin, Colorado  Plateau,  and the
Wyoming  Basin.  Character•
ized by diverse basin and range topography,  the
region provides  a variety of
habitats for waterbirds including  high mountain lakes,  rivers and streams, both fresh and brackish basin wetlands,  and large alkaline lakes.  Due to the
arid climatea result of      £
the  rainshadow cast by the  [
mountain West serve as life-giving,  yet transient,  oases for aquatic birds. The region's  dispersed  lakes, marshes and riparian  zones host about 40 waterbird species, including  many  or most of world's  Eared  Grebes, American White Pelicans, White-faced Ibises,  and Cali• fornia  Gulls. The  competing demands  for human uses of water, such as agriculture,  development,  and recre• ation pose the  greatest threat to waterbird populations. The presence  of contaminants  (e.g.,  mercury,  DDT  and its breakdown products) is also a significant regional threat.  Because of the West's feast-or-famine water
regime,  the lntermountain West regional plan will stress
the  necessity of conserving  a network of high-quality wetland habitats with secure water sources  in order  to provide  options for waterbirds  during  drought and flood cycles.

Boreal
This immense  region arches  across the length  of Cana• da. It includes  the tundra  of the low arctic  and the forests of the subarctic,  as well as the boreal  forest. Dominant features include, from west to east,  the Mackenzie  River and its tributaries, the softwood forests  of the boreal  transition zone, the Hudson  Plains (the largest extensive area of wetlands  in the world), and eastern seacoasts.  Glacially carved,  low lying wet• lands  cover a large percentage  of the  region  and wide• spread permafrost results  in lowlands  being water• logged or wet for prolonged periods  of time.  Several major  river deltas  occur in the  central portion of the region,  including  the  Saskatchewan River delta,  Peace• Athabasca River delta,  and Slave River delta,  all of which  are critically important to migrating and breed•
ing waterbirds.  Coastal
marshes  and extensive tidal flats  are present at Hudson  Bay and on the Atlantic shorelines. This region provides  extensive breeding habitats for large populations of waterbirds. Other breeding  marshbirds include  four species of grebes, American Bittern, Sora, Yellow Rail,  as well
as the American White
mountains to the west•
the  wetlands  of the  Inter-

() M
Virginia Rail
Pelican and a variety of gulls and terns. An abun-


Black-vented Shearwater     2  Audubon's Shearwater             Little Shearwater     2  Wandering Albatross


46                                                                                                                 WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
dance  of seabirds,  including  a number of alcid species,  utilize the  shorelines  and  open  oceans on the  Atlantic coast.  Most waterbird habitats  in the  region are in a comparatively pristine state  relative to those  in more southern  regions.  However,  the cumulative impacts  of develop• ing forestry,  fisheries,  mining, hydroelectric,  oil  and  gas development,  transportation infrastructure,  and  other indus• trial  activities  in the  north are resulting  in degradation of habitats. As well,  the  impacts
of climate  change  may  be  a more  immediate  and larger
concern  at higher  latitudes               Black Guillemots
than  elsewhere.  Finally,  regard-
less of breeding area affiliations,  all migrants to the region  are exposed  to a wide  array of environmental hazards  during  migration and on wintering areas.  Plan• ning in the  Boreal region will focus first on gaining a better understanding of populations, particularly the least abundant and most poorly  understood.  Some of the research  and monitoring challenges  facing planning efforts in the  Boreal region  are common everywhere, while  others  are unique to the  northern situation.

Arctic Canada
This region includes  low-lying,  coastal tundra  and drier uplands  of the Arctic mountains  across the  entire northern edge of Canada.  Because of thick  and continu• ous permafrost,  surface water dominates the landscape (20-50  percent of the  coastal plain).  Freezing and thaw• ing form a patterned mosaic of polygonal  ridges and ponds,  and many rivers bisect the  plain  and flow into
the  Arctic Ocean.The  open  seawaters of the Beaufort Sea,  Chukchi Sea,Arctic  Ocean,  and Hudson  Bay are frozen  much  of the year,  and the  ice pack is never far from shore.  Breeding species include  a variety of larids (aegers,  gulls, terns),  alcids (guillemots,  auklets, murres, puffins,  and murrelets),  loons and Sandhill  Cranes. Few bird species of any type  winter in the region.

Northern Prairie and Parkland
The Northern Prairie and Parkland  region,  extending



























from the  southern edge of prairie  Canada's boreal  for• est,  across the international border,  and south to the banks of the Missouri,  is an area composed primarily  of mixed-grass  prairie. Aspen  poplar  woods  form a belt of "parklands" along the region's  northern boundary. The region offers waterbirds  a tremendous variety and often high density of small wetlands  or "potholes", ranging from wet meadows  and shallow water ponds, to saline lakes, marshes  and fens.  Oxbow  wetlands  created by
the  changing  flow of small prairie  rivers  and streams,
and human created reservoirs  dot the  landscape. Widely regarded  as the most important waterfowl production area in North America,  the region hosts twenty-four colonial  and fifteen  non-colonial species of breeding waterbirds including  the  endangered interior Least Tern.A  number of species  reach  their  highest densities or have breeding ranges contained largely within the region,  notably the American White Pelican, Eared Grebe,  California  Gull,  Black Tern,  Forster's Tern and Franklin's  Gull. The  challenge  for the Northern Prairie and Parkland  regional plan is operating in a landscape significantly affected by agriculture,  oil/gas and other human development activities which  factor immensely in the region's  conservation issues. Wetland loss and deterioration tops the list,  which  is further influenced
by the region's natural cycles of drought and inunda•
tion.The widespread and uncertain  ramifications  of global warming  will affect the regional plan's  strategies
Short-tailed Albatross   _ Black-footed Albatross   =  Laysan Albatross   _ Black-browed Albatross   ~

WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   47
to combat wetland loss and  properly manage  associated upland habitats  for the  benefit of waterbirds  and  other bird  species.

Central Prairies
The  Central Prairies region,  stretching across the U.S. heartland,  is characterized by a semi-arid climate and consists  of rolling plains vegetated with shortgrass and mixed-grass  prairie. Native grassland vegetation exists in many  areas, especially  in the  north and west,  and
ranching  is a dominant land use. Rowcrop  agriculture is
a more prevalent land use in the  eastern parts of the region. Wetland resources  are relatively sparse and con• sist mostly  of river-associated wetlands, playas and depressional wetlands. The region supports significant breeding populations of interior Least Terns,  Black Terns,  Eared  Grebes,  Black-crowned Night-Herons, American Bitterns,  and Vir•
ginia Rails. Additionally,  critical
migratory stopover habitat for Mid-continent Sandhill  Cranes and Whooping Cranes  is found along the  Platte River in Nebraska  and in other wetland
complexes in the region.  There
is lack of adequate information 3
on habitat use, and population  I
sizes and trends  for many            o
waterbirds in this region.  Pri-        Least Terns
mary threats to waterbirds in
the  Central Prairies region include  unpredictable rain• fall patterns,  and habitat loss or degradation due to agricultural activity  and urban  development.The  Cen• tral  Prairies regional  plan will focus on documenting critical waterbird sites/landscapes and identifying infor• mation gaps which  may hinder  the  effective monitoring and management of waterbird populations.

Upper Mississippi Valley/Great Lakes
The Upper Mississippi  Valley/Great Lakes (UMVGL) region is a diverse  area lying in the  middle  of North America. About 40 species of waterbirds  occur  in the region,  and among  the  priority species there  are Least, Common,  Black,  and Forster's Terns; Black-crowned
and Yellow-crowned Night-Herons;American  and  Least
Bitterns; Yellow,  Black,  and King Rails;  and Common Loons.  Superabundant species that are causing human conflicts include  Double-crested Cormorants  and Ring-
billed  Gulls. The UMVGL region provides  a variety of waterbird nesting,  roosting,  and foraging habitats, including islands,  natural and managed wetlands,  lakes and lake shorelines,  reservoirs, rivers and floodplains, sand and gravel bars, beaches,  and Great Lakes coastal estuaries. The  Great Lakes and "big rivers" (Mississippi, Illinois,  Ohio,  and Missouri  Rivers) provide  a founda• tion  for much  of the  important waterbird habitat in the region.  Parts of the  region  are heavily  forested or have rugged terrain with few wetlands,  and these  support lit• tle waterbird use. Wetland losses from urban  develop• ment, river dredging  and diking,  and agricultural drainage have reduced the  amount of waterbird habitat in the  region,  and water quality has been  impacted by agricultural and industrial runoff.  Dredged material island creation,  wetland creation and restoration activi• ties,  and water control structures have provided new
waterbird habitat in some areas. Fluctuating water levels in the  Great Lakes have reduced habitat for some species and enhanced habitat for others. A primary goal of the  UMVGL regional  plan is to ensure  the  availability of
waterbird nesting and foraging
sites by protecting,  restoring, and managing  a variety of habitat types throughout the region.  Other limiting factors
to UMVGL waterbirds include  human disturbance, pre•
dation,  nest-site competition,  altered food base,  con•
taminants,  and conflicts with humans.


Southeast U.S.
This Southeast region borders the  southeastern U.S., stretching from eastern Texas and Oklahoma,  capturing the  Florida peninsula,  and extending northward into eastern North Carolina  and Virginia. It extends into the Gulf of Mexico  and pelagic  areas off both the Atlantic and Gulf coasts. Particularly important waterbird habi• tats in the  region include  pelagic  areas, marshes, forest• ed wetlands,  and barrier  and sea island complexes. The Southeast U.S. region is particularly critical to 15
species of waterbird.  Federally listed taxa include
breeding populations of Wood  Stork,  the  Mississippi subspecies of Sandhill  Crane, Whooping Crane,  interior
Least Tern,  and Gulf coast populations of Brown  Peli-

Shy Albatross     e  Yellow-nosed Albatross      =  Light-mantled Albatross      _   Wilson's Storm-Petrel      =

48                                                       WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
can.The  population trends  for the  long-legged wading  species  in the  region  vary  and  are of great  interest,  as these  birds  are important  eco• logical indicators  for restoring  the  Everglades and  for identifying  environmental  problems elsewhere   (e.g.,  Okefenokee Swamp). Among concerns  requiring  region-wide attention  are mortality  of waterbirds  associated  with various fisheries  ("waterbird bycatch,"  depredation con• trol  at aquaculture ponds  and  other  facilities), loss and  deterioration  of habitat,  disturbance of nesting areas  (particularly  those  of beach-nest• ing terns  and  skimmers),  and  effects  from  con• taminants. A key objective of the  Southeast regional  plan  is the  standardization  of data  col• lection efforts  and  analysis procedures across
the  region.  This  will allow  better tracking  of            American Coot
regional  movements  and the  association  of
these  movements with environmental or land use changes to better recommend effective conservation measures.

Mid-Atlantic/New England/Maritimes
Stretching from the  southern end of the  Chesapeake Bay to the  Gulf of St.  Lawrence, this region offers a great variety of coastal habitats. The islands and shores of the  Chesapeake and Delaware  Bays host large mixed colonies  of coastal and wading waterbirds,  as do the estuaries  and embayments formed  behind mid-Atlantic barrier  islands. Most of the world's  population of Roseate Tern nests on the  islands of southern New  Eng• land,  as do large numbers  of other terns  and gulls.
Sandy shores  give way to the rocky or muddy  intertidal
shorelines  of northern New  England  and Canada's  mar• itime provinces.  Here,  Black Guillemots breed  on the coast, while  Leach's  Storm-Petrel, gulls,  terns,  and the southern-most populations  of breeding alcids nest on offshore  islands. The inland ponds,  lakes,  and river val• leys  often  offer more  isolation for waterbirds than coastal habitats, though  they  freeze  earlier  and easier. Development pressure  is a critical issue for this region, which  hosts tremendously dense human populations, especially  in its southern end.  Overexploitation of coastal resources  and contamination  are also key
threats. The  planning  effort for the  Mid-Atlantic/New
England/Maritimes region has the  advantage  of being able to draw on the  knowledge  and expertise of a num•
ber of locally based waterbird working  groups.
Pacific Islands
The Pacific Islands waterbird planning  region extends across a vast area of the  north and central Pacific Ocean encompassing numerous islands and island groups
under  U.S. jurisdiction. The region stretches  5,000
miles from east to west and 3,000  miles from north to south  and includes  some of the  most isolated islands in the world. The physical  geography  ranges from moun• tainous,  alpine  environments to low-lying tropical  atolls just a few feet above sea level.This  region  is of interna• tional  importance for both endemic  species  (an evolu• tionary  result of island isolation)  and migratory water• birds  capable  of crossing great distances  of open  ocean. This region  supports millions  of breeding seabirds rep• resenting 30 species, including  the  entire global popula• tion of Hawaiian  Dark-rumped Petrel and Newell's Shearwater  and greater than  98% of the world  popula• tions of Laysan and Black-footed Albatross. Unfortu• nately,  the  small size and isolation of these  islands increases the  vulnerability of individual  species  and
their  habitats.  Rails,  coots,  and gallinules  (several of which  are endemic) are at risk of becoming endangered or are already extinct.  Habitat loss and degradation associated with human development and invasive species have devastated native flora and fauna,  especial• ly on the more  developed islands. Introduced species (predators,  herbivores,  insects,  plants,  etc.), introduced diseases,  contaminants,  and mortality resulting from interactions with commercial fisheries  pose serious
threats to waterbirds, both on land  and at sea.The  U.S.

White-faced Storm-Petrel    = Polynesian Storm-Petrel    2 European Storm-Petrel    _ Least Storm-Petrel    2


WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   49
Pacific Islands  regional  plan  will synthesize  the  conser• vation  issues of the  region  and  prioritize management efforts  to address  them.

Caribbean
This region includes  Bermuda,  the islands and waters of the  Caribbean Basin,  and the  islands and waters  off the northern coast of South America.The majority of these islands are of volcanic  origin,  thus  dispersal  of species from surrounding continents  and subsequent evolution in isolation have shaped the region's  avifauna  and pro• duced  a number of endemic species. Breeding residents and local migrants, wintering or migrating neotropical migrants,  and non-breeding austral migrants  can all be found  in the region.  The waterbirds occurring  on each particular island are dependent on its size  (ranging
from Cuba's 110,860 km2  to tiny rocky islets)  and
topography and the  resulting  suite of marine  and fresh• water habitats.  Coastline  extension and shelf width affect the presence  and nature of beaches,  estuaries, mud flats and mangroves.  Mangroves  provide  foraging habitat for waterbirds seeking fish and invertebrates,
and Brown Pelicans,  as well as many species of herons
and egrets,  roost and nest in the  mangrove  canopy. Sandy and rocky coasts,  as well as offshore  rocks and
reefs,  are also routinely used  as nest locations  and roosts by shorebirds,  gulls, terns and wading birds.  Saltwater ponds  and lagoons, formed  as a result of the  growth  of corals across the  mouth of an indented shoreline,  can provide  an important prey base for waders. Artificial spoil islands formed  from dredging  are used by several species of birds. Artificial freshwater habitats can also
be very important,  as Caribbean islands often  have few natural inland bodies  of fresh water. Reservoirs con• structed for the purposes  of potable water, irrigation, power,  and flood control;  ponds  for irrigation,  livestock, or aesthetic reasons;  and irrigation  canals  can all serve
as waterbird habitat.Where  rivers, streams,  or creeks occur, they  range from rapid  flows in the  steep  moun• tains to slower and more  winding  courses  across the lowlands.  Habitat destruction and disturbance associat• ed with a growing human population are the principal threats in the  Caribbean,  notably deforestation, destruction of mangroves  and other wetlands, hunting, and the  introduction  of exotic predators. Water pollu• tion,  siltation of water bodies,  and excessive with• drawals of fresh water are also problems. These  threats have caused  declines in a number of waterbird and
other aquatic bird species,  including  the globally threat•
ened Bermuda  Petrel,  Black-capped Petrel, West Indian





























Anhinga


Wedge-rumped Storm-Petrel   2 Band-rumped Storm-Petrel            Leach's Storm-Petrel          Tristram's Storm-Petrel   2


50                                                                                                                 WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
Whistling-Duck and  Zapata
Rail.


The  Caribbean region's  island nations  for the  most part
have  limited  capacity for con• servation  action.  Moreover, these  nations  share  an ecolog• ical identity not  reflected  by political boundaries. Thus,  a multinational conservation planning  and implementation effort is  required to effect conservation action in this region. This  effort should address  the  needs  of all
aquatic birds,  including seabirds,  coastal birds,  wading birds,  marshbirds,  shorebirds, and waterfowl,  in order  to make  the  most  effective  use of resources. As  an important first step,  the  Society  for the Conservation and  Study  of
Caribbean Birds  has formed  a
Waterbirds  Task Fo rce  for the
Caribbean region.  It is pro-         Wood  Stork
posed that this working
group  conduct workshops to bring together stakehold• ers in aquatic bird  conservation to enable  them  to define and coordinate  regional  conservation action.The group  will determine and document regional  and national population goals, habitat management goals, avian (waterbird)  monitoring goals and techniques,  and important aquatic bird areas (IBAs); identify needs and
develop  training  and educational materials;  and develop
and implement priority conservation projects. It is hoped that Caribbean planning  will foster waterbird interests in the  Caribbean,  generate additional species• based working  groups,  secure increased  funding  for aquatic bird conservation projects,  and surmount politi• cal obstacles to access and collaboration.

Central America
The  Central America  region is defined  by the  seven nations of Central America  and adjacent ocean areas. The region has 6,603  km of coast (approximately  12%
of the Latin American and Caribbean coastline),  with
approximately 567,000 hectares  of mangroves  (8% of world's  total),  plus  1,600 km of coral reef. The low-lying coastal zones include  many
I                  estuaries and extensive
lagoons, important as water•
bird  habitat.The  Gulf  of Fonseca,  a natural,  shallow Pacific harbor  shared  by El Salvador,  Honduras,  and Nicaragua, is similar to the Gulf of California,  with estu• aries, marshes,  rocky coast• line,  and islets.  On the Atlantic side,  the Honduras Bay islands and reefs host local colonies of seabirds while offshore  waters in the Caribbean serve as foraging grounds  for locally nesting
seabirds  and migrants. The
5  region  also contains the  huge
8  Isabel Lake (Guatemala) and
3  Nicaragua  and Managua
o Lakes (Ni. caragua),  and a
regional system of volcanic lakes,  such as Ilopango  (El
Salvador);Am~titlan  and Atitl~n  (Guatemala);  and the Arenal  reservoir  (Costa Rica).  Extensive flood plains are found  along the Mosquitia (Nicaragua  and Hon• duras); the Belize River (Belize),  and La Pasion, Polochic  and Cahabon rivers (Guatemala).

Central America's coasts and wetlands contribute great• ly to local,  national and regional  economies,  but their importance is not always recognized and protection and management are often lacking.  Conservation action in the region  should include  the promotion of greater awareness  of these  important ecosystems, primarily  via local projects to demonstrate the feasibility of sustain• able resource  use. A process  similar to that being devel• oped  for the  Caribbean is suggested for the  region.The first step  would  be to assemble  those  individuals  willing to work towards  developing  a regional waterbird con• servation plan into a working  group. This working
group,  starting with identification of core participants,
would  conduct workshops  to facilitate planning; <level-
Markham's Storm-Petrel     _ Black Storm-Petrel    =  Ashy Storm-Petrel     =  Fork-tailed  Storm-Petrel    2

WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   51
areas. The major  threats  to waterbirds on the high seas are oil and other contaminant spills,  discarded  plastics and other pollution,  fisheries  conflicts and the  unknown impacts of altered  ocean cycles. Activities on the  conti• nental shelves, such as ocean dumping and sand mining, can also directly or indirectly  impact pelagic birds. Seabird  conservation planning  for the  Pacific and Atlantic Regions will call for continued research  and additional monitoring,  and will explore how policy changes, enforcement,  and alleviation of threats can be
5                                                                                                                                                    accomplished via international communication and
z#                                                                     cooperation.
O

Sooty  Shearwater


op population and habitat goals;  determine monitoring needs  and approaches;  support identification,  protec• tion  and management of waterbird IBAs;  create training and education materials;  and identify and implement model  conservation projects.  Integration across national borders and of the  needs  of all aquatic birds  (i.e., waterbirds,  shorebirds,  and waterfowl) is suggested as
the  most efficient approach to conservation, though the
development of conservation strategies and monitoring could be done  on a subregional basis,  along the  Pacific slope, Atlantic slope and interior lakes.  It is recognized that funding  is critical for this region to move  forward with waterbird planning  and conservation.

Pacific and Atlantic
These  regions refer to the  high seas of the  Pacific and Atlantic, which  are regularly  utilized by the  pelagic seabirds  considered in the  Plan,  including  shearwaters, petrels,  storm-petrels, puffins, fulmars,  gannets,  skuas, kittiwakes, jaegers,  and auks. Though consisting entirely of open water, these  regions  offer habitat of varying quality,  depending on distance from land,  latitude and the  shifting  character of the water  (i.e., temperature, salinity, nutrients,  and biological  communities). Because of fluctuations in weather and food supply,  and because food often  has a patchy distribution,  most pelagic seabirds must travel constantly and over enormous
areas. Information on the  movements  and distribution is lacking for many pelagic seabird  species, in part because of their  extensive movements.  It is known  that after nesting in very crowded colonies, many species continue to congregate outside  the breeding  season in areas of high productivity,  such as upwellings.  Huge flocks of
Sooty and Greater Shearwaters have been  seen in these
local Waterbird (onervation

onservation planning  at the local level is essential. Many waterbirds are part of the local communities that humans  inhabit and survive within  the human•
dominated landscape. Local action and community-based conservation may well be the most important level of implementation. Many different locally-based  agencies or groups share responsibilities for the management of birds and their habitats with national governments. The Plan recognizes  and encourages  a diversity of local conserva• tion efforts on behalf of waterbirds.

The  approaches that local governments and organiza• tions  use for planning  and conservation action for waterbirds will differ  markedly depending on local con• ditions, resources,  opportunities, needs and interests. These  should  enhance, rather than  weaken,  overall con• servation success. Not only will a diversity of approach• es allow conservation to fit to the  local situation but will provide  experiments in conservation,  the  results of which  can inform  actions elsewhere.

Despite the  necessity and desirability of flexibility, it does remain  important that local planning and imple• mentation of waterbird conservation be connected to continental, national,  state and regional  goals, programs and opportunities. This will ensure  the  availability of information,  ideas, planning  assistance and resources  as well as use of common protocols,  such as those  devel• oped for monitoring. Mechanisms used should  bring partners together to conserve  birds  and habitats on a landscape level. Cooperation among  state and provin• cial biologists,  non-government organizations, especially community-based organizations, is essential.


52                                                         WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
Particular  progress  towards  goals identified in this  Plan could  be  made  at the  local level  by identifying  key  local sites.  Imbedding waterbird  conservation in special  site management is particularly well  situated  to engage
local  stakeholders  in site  monitoring  and  protection, while  at the  same  time  serving  as a vehicle  to address research,  education and  outreach,  and coordination and integration  priorities.

Possible  elements  of a local  conservation program:
❖  Set goals to achieve  waterbird conservation,
❖  Collaborate with regional  waterbird conservation working  groups  to assess waterbird status and local conservation needs,
❖  Become  familiar  with regional  scale assessments of waterbird status, habitat priorities and other needs and opportunities, but do not be limited by them,
❖  Develop programs to manage  waterbirds and their habitats at local sites,  including  parks and preserves, for multiple purposes, including public  involvement,
❖  Identify waterbird biologists able to facilitate,  guide
and manage  local waterbird conservation,
❖  Monitor waterbird colony sites, breeding populations,
wintering numbers  (where  appropriate),  and habitats and link to the  continent-wide monitoring partner• ship,
❖  Develop  programs,  methods and protocols to protect,
conserve  and manage  habitat used by waterbirds,
❖  Identify candidate sites for IBAs for waterbirds; help evaluate status,  and ensure  adequate protection of sites selected for conservation,
❖  Identify colonies  or important wetlands that may not
meet IBA criteria but serve to educate and increase public  awareness  of waterbirds,
❖  Secure  protection of important colony sites, breeding sites,  habitats and IBAs for waterbirds,  and manage these  sites for waterbirds,
❖  Develop  broad-base partnerships among  government, business, and local conservationists for waterbird con• servation,
❖  Develop  an information and education strategy including  "how-to" publications for managers  and the public,  and provide  mechanisms to incorporate waterbirds in local education and outreach programs,
❖  Assure  consideration of waterbird conservation needs in land acquisition,  land management,  regulation, planning and zoning,  and
❖  Identify scientific and management information needs,  and secure resources  through partnerships to fill these  needs.

The Bottom line

he Plan does not propose the  creation of a stand• alone delivery infrastructure for waterbirds. To the contrary; waterbird conservation should  be accom•
plished, to the  extent possible,  within existing struc• tures,  agencies and organizations. With a few excep• tions, such as the  Waterbird Monitoring Partnership and a waterbird conservation communication strategy,  the Plan does not advocate new programs dedicated to waterbirds. Alternatively,  the  Plan advocates the  inclu• sion of waterbird conservation action within existing programs,  and where  appropriate, refocusing or expand• ing programs  to enhance  their  abilities to achieve
waterbird conservation.








Lea Island, North Carolina
Although largely imbedded within  existing structures and organizations,  waterbird conservation requires  staff and program support.  Staff needs include  positions and support funds  dedicated at least in part to waterbirds. Program  support includes  the  delivery  mechanisms for
waterbird conservation. At this time,  existing staff size


WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   53
TABLE  4. Resources Needed for Waterbird  Conservation in the Americas

Programs                                   Waterbird  Positions                          Lead and Participating              No.  of Positions/ Organizations                    Annual  Funding
(x $1000)

Waterbird Conservation for the Americas  initiative
Waterbird Conservation Council (volunteer representatives for the range of partners  and interests)
0/10

Waterbird Monitoring
Partnership


Waterbird conservation communication program

Waterbird IBA identification and conservation
Waterbird Monitoring
Coordinator


Waterbird Communication and Outreach Coordinator

IBA coordinators
USGS Patuxent Wildlife
Research  Center, national, state,  local partners

NGO


National Audubon Society,  and other BirdLife International partners
1/2,200



1/150


1+/2,000

Seabird population monitoring and fisheries issues programs

Priority  research  projects

Habitat restoration and conservation programs
Seabird  conservation coordinators     Pacific Seabird  Group, other NGOs, conventions, national and state agencies

National agencies and NGOs

National agencies and NGOs
1+/4,000



2/1,000

2/20,000

National waterbird conservation:
Canada

U.S.


National waterbird coordinator National waterbird coordinator National waterbird coordinator


Canadian Wildlife Service

U.S. Fish and Wildlife  Service

Other national natural resource agencies in U.S.


1/200

1/200

26/2,600

Mexico

Nations of Central
America  and Caribbean

NGO waterbird programs

Regional waterbird conservation:
North American regions

Caribbean and
Central America  regions:

planning/coordination




surveys, monitoring, conservation action and site programs

Local waterbird conservation and site-based programs
National waterbird coordinator         NABCI  Mexico  Council

National waterbird coordinators         Wildlife  agencies  and NGOs and specialists

Organization waterbird specialists     NGOs



Regional waterbird conservation working  groups



Caribbean and Central American working  groups,  Society for the Conservation and Study of Caribbean Birds, BirdLife International, other NGOs

National agencies, Ducks  Unlimited, other NGOs, site-based partnerships, other partnerships

Community-based organizations
1/200

30/300


?/?



0/250


7/200






2/1,000



2/1,000


54                                                                                                                 WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
and  resources  are inadequate  to carry  out the  work  that must be  done  to assure  waterbird conservation in the Plan area.  Resources  needed to  accomplish further planning  and  implementation  are shown  in Table  4.

Partner in Implementation

t this point in time  it is possible  to recognize  many of the  partners that will be called upon  in imple• menting waterbird conservation as outlined in this
Plan.  It is hoped and anticipated that additional organi•
zations, as well as new innovative approaches to water• bird  conservation, will be incorporated into this Plan in subsequent versions.

The Waterbird Conservation  for the Americas
Initiative
Implementation of the  Plan,  especially  in the  form  of on-the-ground conservation action,  is the purpose of the Waterbird initiative. As previously described,  the
Council  will serve as the  keeper  of the  Plan and the  ini•
tiator and facilitator of conservation action at all levels by setting continental goals, seeking funding,  and devel• oping infrastructure, partnerships,  and communication linkages. Improving information through monitoring is
the  core function of the Waterbird Monitoring Partner-
ship,  made  up of an array of partners throughout North America,  Central America, and the  Caribbean.  Dissemi• nation of information,  as well as education and public awareness  will be directed by the  waterbird conserva• tion communications program.  In Canada,  U.S., and Mexico, regional  waterbird working  groups,  and other entities formed under  the Waterbird Initiative will inte• grate, where  possible, with the  other bird  initiatives and NABCI.

Other International Coalitions
Key to waterbird implementation is the  formation of networks between the Waterbird initiative and other international coalitions. These  include, but are not lim• ited to, the  Central American Biological Conference, Mesoamerican Biological  Corridor Project,American Pacific Flyway Initiative, Asia Pacific Migratory Water• bird  Conservation Strategy,  Central Pacific Flyway Ini• tiative,  the  North American Flyway Councils,  Circum• polar  Seabird  Working  Group,  Conservation of Arctic Flora and Fauna  (CAFF),  and Beringian  Seabird  Work• ing Group. These  networks should  also connect to par• ties established under  relevant conventions and treaties, for example, the  Convention on Migratory Species (Bonn Convention), Convention on Wetlands of Inter•
national Importance  (the Ramsar Treaty),  and North































Red-billed Tropicbird


WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   55
American  Marine  Protected Areas Network,  a project of the North American  Commission  for Environmental Cooperation (CEC).

Professional Societies
Professional  societies  are important partners  in imple• mentation of the Plan,  as they  can take  the  lead in addressing  the  scientific  and technical needs  described in the  Plan.  In some  areas,  societies can also provide leadership  in developing  conservation strategies. Notable  partners include  the Pacific Seabird  Group, Waterbird  Society,  Society for the  Conservation  and Study of Caribbean  Birds, MesoAmerican Society for Conservation  Biology,  and CIPAMEX.

Environmental Nongovernmental Organizations NGOs,  many of which  operate internationally,  are also critical partners  in waterbird implementation. NGOs with interests  and missions  compatible with the  conser• vation of waterbirds  should  consider  the  needs  and opportunities  to deliver waterbird conservation within their conservation activities. The Waterbird Initiative especially urges  the  continued engagement in waterbird conservation by its  current special partners:  National Audubon Society via the U.S.  and State  IBA programs; Ducks Unlimited through monitoring  and cooperative habitat work in Canada,  the U.S.  and Latin America; Pronatura and CIPAMEX  as advocates for waterbird partnerships in Mexico;  Manomet Center for Conserva• tion  Sciences  for its  long-term,  parallel interests in shorebird  and wading bird  conservation;
Point Reyes Bird Observatory through its work on Marine  Protected Areas and other seabird conservation issues; Wildlife  Management Institute through flyway management and its interests in marshbird  conservation; International Association of Fish
and Wildlife  Agencies via its facili•
tation of state implementation; National Fish and Wildlife  Founda• tion  and its  networks in Central America  and Caribbean;  BirdLife International,Americas  Division  via the Central American  and Caribbean
IBA programs  and waterbird conservation
partnerships  in member  countries;The Nature Conservancy  via its bird  conservation program; Canadian  Nature Federation  and Bird  Studies  Cana• da for their  IBA program  coordination in Canada;


56
American  Bird Conservancy  though  its  PanAmerican program;  and Wetlands  International in developing  an international waterbird census  and flyway initiatives.

Government Agencies
Governmental bodies  at all scales are key partners  in implementing waterbird conservation strategies. The Trilateral  Committee, representing national  wildlife agencies in Canada,  U.S.  and Mexico,  facilitates cooper• ation for conservation  of wildlife  and habitat common to the three  countries.  In Canada,  the  Canadian
Wildlife  Service will work with NABCI  Canada  Coun• cil and federal,  provincial  and territorial natural resource management agencies,  non-government con• servation organizations,  and other specialists  as deter• mined  through the development of Wings  Over Water: Canada's  National Waterbird  Conservation Plan.  The
structure  of bird  conservation in Mexico  centers  on the
NABCI Mexico  Council.  In the U.S., migratory bird management is one of the  principal  responsibilities  of the U.S.  Fish and Wildlife  Service. The U.S.  Fish and Wildlife  Service  is encouraged to appoint and support  a permanent waterbird coordinator within the  Division
of Migratory  Bird  Management.This  person  should concentrate  on assisting regional planning  efforts  and implementation,  facilitate  functioning  of the  Council, and be a spokesperson  for waterbird conservation in the U.S. This  individual  should have  a budget sufficient to support travel,  facilitation  and small grants.

Other U.S. federal  agencies concerned with land man• agement and responsible  for bird  conservation are also encouraged  to employ  and support national waterbird
coordinator/biologists whose  responsibility  is over•
seeing waterbird management within their agencies. The U.S. D .A.  Forest Service is
encouraged to employ  waterbird biolo•
gists  at all organizational  levels,  includ•
ing the  national  and international level,  in order to address waterbird conservation needs within the Tak•
ing Wing  Program  and other bird
conservation initiatives. Additional U.S.  agencies called upon  to cre• ate waterbird coordinator/ special•
ist positions  within their  national  pro-
grams include:  National  Park Service,  USGS,  Envi•
ronmental Protection Agency,  US  Department of


White Ibis
© WALKERGOLDER


WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
Agriculture Wildlife Services,  Bureau  of Land  Manage• ment,  Bureau  of Indian  Affairs,  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's National Marine  Fish• eries  Service,  Bureau  of Reclamation,  Natural Resources Conservation Service,  Mineral  Management Service,
and  Department of Defense's Services  and Army  Corps of Engineers.

Regional and Taxonomic  Working Groups
Regional  waterbird working  groups  and the  strategies they  develop  are central to future planning efforts and implementation of waterbird conservation actions. Regionally,  implementation will occur  through many different entities including,  but not limited to, federal agencies,  states, provinces,  industry groups, species interest groups, local entities,  and individuals.  State and provincial governments include  and partner with peo• ple whose  engagement is critical to long-term conserva• tion of waterbirds. IAFWA's Shorebird and Waterbird Working  Group,  Migratory Shore and Upland Game Bird Working  Group,  and Bird Conservation Commit• tee are venues  where  state agencies  interface with waterbird conservation interests. The partners in JVs
are specifically focused  on wetland and associated
upland habitat acquisition,  protection,  restoration,  and management.The  Gulf of Maine  Seabird  Working Group  and the  North Pacific Albatross Working  Group are examples  of integral special interest stakeholders.

Community-based  Organizations
Given the  need  to affect waterbird conservation at all geographic  scales,  it must be emphasized that one of
the  principal means  of implementing waterbird conser• vation is through local action.  Cities, towns,  villages, islands,  local governmental organizations,  and NGOs should  be involved. To the  extent that "all conservation is local," waterbirds must be protected,  conserved,  mon• itored,  and managed by people  with the  wisdom  gained by their  intimate knowledge of the  local situation.The
superstructure of continental waterbird planning should be designed  to support local waterbird conservationists and natural resource managers  as they  implement con• servation actions at local colonies, breeding,  roosting,
and feeding  sites,  at local parks, refuges,  and sanctuaries,
and at local patches of aquatic habitat or adjacent pelagic conservation regions. Each colony or breeding site and important feeding  site should  have its  advocate and guardian, backed  by legislation from  local and state governments.

Additional  Partners
It cannot be overemphasized that waterbird conserva• tion will benefit from the  participation of additional partners. Anyone  interested in waterbirds  can con• tribute to their  conservation.  Moreover,  contribution at all scales-be it management at a local sanctuary or international policymaking-is welcome and important. Additional partners will be recognized in subsequent versions of the  Plan.


1     Canadian Wildlife Service.  In prep.  Wings Over Water: Canada's National Waterbird  Conservation Plan. Environment Canada,  Ottawa,Canada


























WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   57
PART4


KIEI6 the ION: lNAR of STRATE6Iand 0lT(0I5


liion

he vision of the Waterbird Conservation for the Americas  initiative is that the  distribution,  diversity, and abundance of populations and habitats of breed•
ing,  migratory, and nonbreeding waterbirds are sus - tained or restored throughout the  lands and waters  of North America,  Central America, and the  Caribbean.

weie and Population 6oal

GOAL: To ensure sustainable distributions, diversi• ty and abundance  ofwaterbird species throughout each oftheir historical or naturally expanding ranges in the lands and waters  ofNorth America, Central America, and the Caribbean.

Strategies
❖  Determine population status for all species  of water• birds throughout North America,  Central America, and the  Caribbean.
❖  Institute a large scale,  dispersed,  partnership-based population monitoring system.
❖  Initiate monitoring of demography,  habitats, winter• ing range,  and important threats,  such as seabird bycatch,  as appropriate for species  and areas.
❖  Develop  analytical  tools  and analytical  schemes  to
determine and assess population trends  against trend thresholds for each species.
❖  Define sustainable population goals for all species,  at
regional  scales as possible  and as needed,  and eventu•
ally at the  continental scale.
❖  Determine the extent and root causes of public percep• tion of waterbirds, particularly  locally abundant species, and develop programs that help bring public  percep• tion in line with scientific and economic findings.
❖  Energize  JVs and agencies to take responsibility for
setting and achieving  population goals through appropriate management.
❖  Develop  a global perspective on populations to aid in interpretation of population trends.
❖   Synthesize information to identify key factors affect-





Blue-footed Booby


ing populations in order  to take appropriate conser•
vation action.


Desired  Results
❖  Waterbirds, their  habitats,  and threats are monitored with sufficient intensity and coordination to accu• rately determine population size, trend,  causes for trends and distribution changes.
❖  Factors influencing waterbird populations are suffi•
ciently  understood to take conservation action.
❖  The influence of wetland complexes at different spa• tial scales on breeding and dispersal  dynamics  is bet• ter understood.
❖  Public  perception is coherent with scientific and eco•
nomic  findings on waterbird impacts.
❖  Management plans  are in accord with technical find•
ings.
❖  Habitat sources  and sinks are recognized.
❖   Species  of concern  are identified,  status assessments


58                                                                                                                 WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
conducted,  sustainable  goals developed,  management plans  enacted,  and  populations  restored  to appropri• ate  sustainable  levels.

llabitat foal

GOAL:  To protect, restore, and manage sufficient high quality habitat and key sites for waterbirds throughout the year to meet species and population goals.

Strategies
❖  Identify key marine,  freshwater,  and terrestrial habi• tats for waterbirds,  including breeding,  wintering, migratory, roosting,  and foraging habitats.
❖  Implement conservation and management actions
that secure  important habitats.
❖  Increase  understanding of waterbird habitat require• ments, threats to habitat quality, and habitat interac• tion  at different scales.
❖  Develop and implement habitat management plans
for waterbirds for each planning unit.
❖  Identify, inventory and document key sites that potentially qualify  as global,  continental,  national,  or state IBAs and other key sites for waterbirds.
❖  Refine and continually update the list and descrip•
tion  of IBAs for waterbirds.
❖  Develop and maintain a communication network among  habitat managers,  including IBAs for water• birds.

Desired  Results
❖  Important waterbird habitats are secured and habitat programs are properly managed.
❖  Important marine  areas are identified and fisheries managed at levels that promote sustainable seabird populations.
❖  Key factors affecting waterbird habitat requirements
are understood.
❖  Best practices are identified to integrate waterbird habitat needs  with other uses of the landscape/seascape and with other bird  conservation initiatives.
❖  New  programs are developed and implemented to
protect and manage  important waterbird habitats at multiple scales.
❖  IBAs and other key sites for waterbirds are identified and catalogued.
❖  IBAs and other key sites are secured through stake• holder  engagement, legislation and/or site manage• ment programs.
❖  Threats affecting IBAs and other key sites are docu•
mented,  understood and managed and a network of area managers exists.





























Little Blue Herons


WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   59
fducation and  Information oal

GOAL: To ensure that information on the conserva• tion ofwaterbirds is widely available to decision makers, the public, and all those whose actions
af   ct waterbird populations.

Strategies
❖  Ensure  that information on waterbird conservation is available  in a form  that is useful  for planning, imple• mentation,  and management purposes.
❖  Increase  effectiveness of communication by partner•
ing with outreach activities for other birds  and for other environmental programs.
❖  Develop relationships with educators of all levels and participate in programs that increase  awareness  and improve education.
❖  Develop and widely  distribute educational informa•
tion  on habitat conservation strategies.
❖  Work with users of waterbird habitats to promote practices and policies  that reduce impacts on the birds.

Desired  Results
❖  Decision makers  and regional  planners incorporate waterbird needs into their plans  and actions.
❖   Citizens, conservationists, and resource managers are made  more  aware  of conservation problems relating to waterbirds.
❖  Increased public  awareness and appreciation of waterbirds is generated.
❖  Best practices and policies  for the conservation of waterbirds are known,  accepted and widely  used.

(oordination and Integration 6oal

GOAL: To ensure that coordinated conservation efforts for waterbirds in the Americas continue, are guided  by common principles, and result in integrat• ed and mutually supportive waterbird conservation actions.

Strategies
❖  Establish cooperative actions with organizations concerned with the conservation,  research,  and man• agement of waterbirds and their habitats.
❖  Establish cooperative actions with other bird  conser•
vation initiatives, particularly through common goal setting,  and multispecies approaches such  as advocat•
ed by NABCI.







Yellow-crowned Night-Heron


❖  Establish cooperative linkages  with other bird  conser•
vation initiatives concerned with aquatic habitats.
❖  When initiatives for other aquatic bird  groups  are not underway,  catalyze simultaneous planning and con• servation of all water-dependent bird  species.
❖   Seek to achieve  integrated bird  conservation action that incorporates the needs  of waterbirds.
❖  Exchange information and expertise with interna• tional,  national,  regional  state/provincial and local partners,  and establish networks between conserva• tionists,  scientists,  and habitat managers.
❖  Develop waterbird plans,  where  appropriate,  at
national,  regional, JV, and state/provincial levels.
❖  Influence environmental policies  and programs to positively affect waterbird conservation.
❖  Participate in international programs in ways that enhance the conservation of waterbirds.
❖  Increase human and financial  resources available for waterbird conservation.

Desired  Results
❖  Waterbird conservation plans  are in place  and coordi• nated at the continental,  national, regional, state/provincial,  and local levels as appropriate.
❖   Common principles that support waterbird conserva• tion  are incorporated into international,  national and state/ provincial legislation,  agreements and partner• ships.
❖  Waterbirds are fully integrated into all bird  conserva•
tion programs continentally,  nationally,  regionally, state/provincially and locally.
❖  Non-government groups  play an active role in pro• moting and implementing waterbird conservation activities.
❖  Priority conservation action is not hindered through
lack of human or financial resources.


60                                                        WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS





4PE\I(

























Horned Grebe

































WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   61

cLt  co  co co ut
aiO  au.On   c  a          c               .O
cl  t cI      cc coo   co co   u to cc









M,..... ,..... ,..... ,..... M""'1" NNMNM""'1" t.n ,..... NN,..... ~MMNNN""'1" ,..... ,..... ,..... ,..... M
5
co r+ctn  cc po  ct  cycle  po  c
aa .....................

Mt.n NNNMM""'1" t.n .......      MM .......
]± a""'1" .......
z

MNt.n ""'1" ""'1" NNt.n
NNNNNM~--NNNNM-M~N~MMMNM-MM~NN          tf t cI cl  cu't   c cl  oo   cl  co   cl  cc c

88MMM""'1"""'1",.....,.....t.nNNNM,.....MMM~8MMN""'1"MMNNN""'1"

t t po  po  ( cl  ey   cl=cy    cycle    co   cc po  (                                           0o   0I  o o uh QI   po  cl  o +c cl  cu't  c

0 0o           0    t ( t   co   cit    co 0 co   t




4
5
2

c

"'
± c lw
£
5   u
d
0     4
"'      .4
5




.c
c  d   c  ¢    c

z
z0        l
8886688%
0UUUU                                                                                                                    €
0
u
il) "z' u0
U•
il)
N
37 z
0
5..
£
"'O
% z£ "'

il)
z£z
r-
2<
c
2- Lb c c-
-r"

1
u
£
~


















227/0%/%/8RI=RIA5% cl  cI I ci ci cc cl  cc ci  cl  ct cl  c o o 0  co co co co co co co co coo  coo


62                                                         WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
.O     c  c       •       ad   c
0 t cI     cl  tut    cl  cu
c      D   c                 c   c        c   c        d
cl  cI o 0I            po  co cl  cu      (L









cl  cc1  co             t t u th       ( 0 ( t  0  0  cl cl cl t (

th  0 cl  t cI     0 0tut  t @  t t  t 0 0o   o c tut    (




t  r ( cl  co   cl  e co   0 ~ ~       et      ~ ~ (]            t ~    cl  e t co   co   (L  cl  (   cl  ( co   cL   c 0L    co  0  0  pt co   cL           (L        (   (]
I                                    I

ct       0,     pt
I                                    I
0 0o    po    0 (I  t t t t tr t   ( t  0.     (L  ~ ~- cl  co   c?           0 0o    t co   tr  t t  t  0 t (]       ( t t ( t t  t !              ~  !              ref    !              (  !              0 t










































t Olp         0 t u        (Op  O
( e   p ( e   (l   (y el  (yr+r=

rt (I OO cl0 t u0 0OOO
444488/8/@8/@ @88 8
o co co co co co 0 co co co co co co cc


WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   63















i             i                                          i                                                                                                                                                            i                                                        i                           i                                                                      i
!                        !                                                                          !
c 0L            co   cL    0I   ( t (I   e
r Lf (l
!
(L          cl  Lt t r !

t !                        !              cl 0    !              r (  0 0o   ( t t t ( !              co   u (  !              c?     !              0  u co   Lt    !


5
2.
5
5"    2•
E       5
£-      •
2   £
-0
2
c=c      5"
•4
z
0
....l
0     .c
¥
3     z
5   -r
8    £
VJ
z
0
5u     .c;
z
5
£


















8I../2I%8I5.38 32/7 4/8/58/ 2/8/.Z/RR/3/82/82-5±02830/37.£2I758/%.£2
rIIIIIII>III   00  00  00  00  00  00  00  00  00  00  00  00  00  00  00  00  00  00  00  000OOOOO00OOOOOO
0o   co co co co co co co co coo  co coo  coo  co co coo  coco coo  coo  co co coco co coo  coo  coo  o coo  co coco co coo  co coco coco co co coo  co 0

64                                                                                                                 WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS






a
8

2
0<
d
c

V
V
d
=                  £

V
a    £
u        _0
0     0    z
2    %
0
<%%  0 00
l U~
2
z% <2@   >-"


.,,
cd      ~   ~  z
5" 5='
j]  •
=3I       8
[fJ                    <u 5l  %
15 ci   (
~u         4l       3%
l      £Q.•
-~•
2.                 ]]
- V
lg  4/
25

8
"'v                                                                                            g £                 z-                                          =             5    3
3
.4
0   "'v
UI<
5            V   d
zE         zd                                                                  d       0           =                    0                  d
-=
2   •                 .4                                          =         £                      d       •    ¢      =        £                                     £                 5
z   z5 +             s
3l.        9     a     5
-J      •;:l                                   [   0               .±       0  '"'"'           z
_                                                                             V                                                                                       u                u                     ".:;'           u
·i•
-=             ¢
V               5            5/5       7
5%  a cl!:    5                                 £'  5
£                                          0       E <    C'
£            d z   cc       a
2                      u         <
§      U      <
Ea,
%
•   .s 5   5            +           +
z         ?      I
0<              55
z
3     4 ,:V;    u"'
·O    ;:l
d     :c
d       •  •
.g
.~   p
0       0  0  0      8
0,           .go       55
c;    c;                   c
o   ·0   ·o  ·O
5                 ii
U      U      U      NN                  u
u   ~0,
0UU      RR
5z                 d       c      d      zd %d                  29
•0      818
5                        i%
%3 #3 .2                                    <                          2
z5i
.c
El5                                z5
z%zl=5
\.92/l&/+
23?l
555555
5
J:

.
V
25        .4
r  rd   U        3
UI• 2£
O   2 zlU
•  Ezl-5--  5%  3
uo Uo ~
;
.c
z       0       : z
±=               5    " E
•=•   %£ .#
8    &3 !F £
t±                   I£ c    !    !                 !           a% (L
tr
lli,
3    O +  3/
I  ~~ a

WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   65


5:
J
£
4





8
0







5
5
5
%
%
~

2
0     z
CLl                   ..
5    VJ
%
.c;
z
-r

<l)


=0

%        5        E:
- £        £                                                                        a
.c           £       3
=
z   e   U= z       U £ 9     £
± z  7
-lz
-r
c    e    z=    2
,..,            ±=              '
5IC
5%
z     t         8/   %                                      J £~    ±
4  u      zl•  z
=? SIJ
c                       • 3z z 3
•   ·i   ~3.5= 3   5± -4
35        5.      5  %                      ?  z
2I                                                                            4a l
%      CLl   2
<    5 .....
r..tl
57 ='-
g iz5= f
±             z±    Se g± 13       0,
•=           cc
2 3           i5
:        2
.c;   t
i •     U
± 55 3    zh
5 lg

z%                  5
ls              E                        z% z5  =               "'
u                • f £
g                                 t
i E• 5               5  ij       C    =
£E5
5E $
£  z4,
5                 z                z£;
c             z                            =  5  £                 ~                    =
i
E
5lg
5                      E            ii
£
--,:; --,:;        --,:;
•          5        5  E   ±
!           ggE      5I    "'
5z               e
E5
z/
±                   =3    £  £
z.9                                                                 t E
"'                                                                 5
Cl
8    i:l
E       s/5   EE
£l.1                                5 c2        Vl  "-I
ii  ±
z          5   45 i ~       2
""'         £                   £
e

2   (      tr         p                        52
±:
!                 !                  !           5  !                              8
!                                                                           !                  !                 !                  !           00                   !                 !                                     !           •
} t' 3=    (L               -
0         tr LO                                                                                                         2
5   0         (M      3        u 35 iZ     om  c    a, -   0O   00  0    R!   0
oG
8la a
0  O                   p 0O    0O          co               0  O      0               00
c?           0 po  co      po  0     c 0o   po  0 0 po  co

66                                                        WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
PP0X2

(0ISER4II0S1Tl4SE/ET PR0I0KL
for (0U0I\AL WATERBIRDS

Assessment Process
A committee developed a process  for assigning colonial  birds to categories  of conservation  concern.This protocol was adapted from the  Partners in Flight and U.S.  Shorebird Con• servation Plan guidelines  and accommodates the special  con• servation issues of species that aggregate during  breeding sea• son and/or utilize extensive marine  habitats.  Conservation status was determined by evaluating six factors that reflect vulnerability to population decline. These  factors were scored and each species was assigned to a category of conservation concern  using a step-wise categorization process. All factor scores were  derived  within the  spatial context of the Plan
area (e.g., they do not reflect global status for those  species
occurring outside of the Plan area). Moreover, factor scores are relative to each other and are not benchmarks, meaning that species will occur in all categories, including those  of lower  conservation concern.

Factor Scores
Six factors were  considered when  evaluating the  conservation status of a species  at the  continental scale. Three  factors are based  on quantitative information (Population Size, Breeding Distribution, Non-breeding Distribution) and three  on quali• tative information (Population Trend,Threats  to Breeding Populations, Threats  to Non-breeding Populations).All  fac• tors  are scaled from  1   to 5, with 5 indicating greatest vulner• ability. Each species was assigned to a category of conserva• tion  concern  based  on these  factor scores.

Population Trend  (PT):  This factor reflects  estimated popula• tion  trends  based  on existing information.The time  period over which  trend was estimated for most species was 1970 to present.
5        biologically  significant population decline
4       apparent population decline
3        apparently stable population
2        apparent population increase
1            biologically  significant population increase

Population Size  (PS):  This factor provides  information on the current (1990-present)  abundance of each species within North America. Log-transformed population data produced a normal  distribution,  and the 1   to 5  scale represents quintiles of the range of log-transformed values.
5        up to 480 individuals
4       480 - 5,800  individuals
3        5,800  --69,200 individuals
2        69,200-- 832,000 individuals
1             832,000 - 10,000,000 individuals
Threats  to Breeding   (TB):  This factor rates the threats impacting most or all of the  total North American population of each  species  during  their  breeding season.The importance of vulnerability due to concentration (coloniality)  was consid• ered when  scoring this factor.  Species that do not breed  in North America  received  a Not Applicable (NA)  for this
score.
5        Known  threats  are actually occurring  and can be documented; concentration results  in actual risk
4       Significant potential threats exist, but have not actually occurred; concentration results  in high potential risk
3        No known  threats, or information not available;
concentration not a risk
2        Threats  assumed  to be low from  all factors including concentration
1             Demonstrably secure

Threats  to Non-breeding (TN):  This factor rates the threats known  to exist for each species during  their  non-breeding season.The scores are the same  as for the  Threats to Breed• ing factor, but without the additional risk due to concentra• tion during  breeding.

Breeding  Distribution (BD):  This factor reflects the vulnera• bility to population loss due to a small breeding distribution. Total land-based breeding area in North America  was estimat• ed in square  kilometers.  Breeding ranges were determined using range maps  (primarily from  Harrison, P.    Seabirds:  an identification guide. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company;
1985. 448 p.  and from the American Ornithological Union's Birds of North America  accounts).The  1   to 5  scale was creat• ed with log-transformed data.  Species that do not breed  in North America  receive  a Not Applicable (NA)  for this score.
5        highly  restricted  (up to 450,000 km?)
4        local (450,000 km2  - 1,500,000 km2)
3        intermediate (1,500,000 km? - 5,000,000 km)
2        widespread (5,000,000 km2   - 16,000,000 km2)
1             very widespread  (16,000,000 km? - 52,500,000 km?)

Non-breeding Distribution (ND):  This factor reflects the vulnerability to population loss due to small non-breeding distribution, that is, the total area occupied by non-breeding birds  (including wintering,  migratory, and in some cases breeding areas) in North America.  Non-breeding ranges were determined using the  standardized procedures and the sources described  above.
5        highly  restricted  (up to  1,300,000 km)
4       local (1,300,000 km2  - 4,200,000 km2)


WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   67
3        intermediate (4,200,000 km2  - 13,600,000 km)
2         widespread (13,600,000 km2  - 44,000,000 km2)
1            very widespread  (44,000,000 km2 - 140,000,000 km)

Categories  of Conservation  Concern
Five categories of conservation concern  were  developed,  and species were  assigned to them using a categorical  approach. The  categories  and the  series of categorization rules are pre• sented below.  Some species could  not be categorized because inadequate data were  available  to assess risk.

1.   Highly Imperiled: This includes  all species with significant population declines  and either low populations or some  other high risk factor.

Rule la.    PT = 5 and either PS, TB, TN, or BD =5

2. High Concern:  Species that are not Highly  Imperiled. Populations of these  species are known  or thought to be declining,  and have some  other known  or potential threat as well.

Rule 2a.    PT = 4 or 5 and either PS, TB, TN,  or BD
=4 or 5;  or
Rule 2b.    PS = 4 or 5 and either TB or TN = 4 or 5
3. Moderate  Concern:  Species that are not Highly  Imperiled or High  Concern.  Populations of these species  are either a) declining  with moderate threats or distributions; b) stable with known  or potential threats  and moderate to restricted distributions; or c) relatively small with relatively restricted distributions.

Rule 3a.    PT =5  and either PS, TB, TN, BD, or ND  > 1;
or
Rule 3b.   PT = 4 and either PS, TB, TN, BD, or ND  > 2;
or
Rule 3c.    PT =3  and either PS, TB, TN, BD, or ND  = 4 or 5; or
Rule 3d.   PS = 4 or 5 and either BD or ND  >3

4. Low Concern:  Species that are not Highly  Imperiled, High Concern or Moderate Concern.  Populations of these  species are either a) stable with moderate threats  and distributions;
b) increasing  but with known  or potential threats  and moder•
ate to restricted distributions;  or c) of moderate size with known  or potential threats  and moderate to restricted distri• butions.

Rule 4a.    PT 3 and either PS, TB, TN, BD, or ND  = 3;
or
Rule 4b.   PT = 2 and either PS, TB, TN, BD, or ND= 4 or
5; or
Rule 4c.    PS =3  and either TB, TN,  BD,  or ND  = 4 or 5

5. Not  Currently At Risk: All other species for which  infor•
mation was available.

Rule 5:      Does  not meet any previous  rule

Information Lacking:  If both Population Trend  and Popula•
tion  Size could  not be estimated, species were not ranked.




























68                                                                                                       WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
APE\I83   Distribution and activity  of colonial  waterbird species             8•            z                                                       ;
presented by Bird Conservation Regions (BCRs) and
2              F           9         z      %                                                     U      =


hown  in parentheses).Activities are: b


breeding;w


wintering;m
i 5    . e

<::                    z    %%

=? =? Ji      zz
adjacent Pelagic Bird  Conservation Regions  (PBCRs,
E                                                                                                       J    U
s                                                                    =                       =                         =
<::         b     '"'<::    g                      U  5
=  E     -4  ?    :=!'~
•            T      E                     .gz   z   5     3#
<z::     %5
migratory/dispersal; p = occurs pelagically  during  wintering and/or  non•               ??    %  Vl     £   ilJ'<>-.     &%  <,   .S  ~±
z                        5%
breeding. Note: U.S.  Pacific Islands  are included with BCR 67,and  mx =              {Q z % z
EE  4g zz
; =     .        • :
E                :i
#5  £  E
S   5.£  U  (l
2= =c
±  ;,l    =g
E    =                      £                              r    2
7
interior Mexican  BCRs combined (43-56,  58-61,65,  66).  BCRs have not           2 z%  5&
%€   d &    g5  £;   ? @?  £2  %2   %
been  established in the Caribbean and Central America.
EU
c.2
CJ&)   O U
£ 5 ?=  4±
5 55 5 5 55
Aleutian/Bering Sea Islands (East Bering Sea)                                                                                      1                p        p       bp                                       b                                        bw Western Alaska (East Bering Sea)                                                                                                              2          p       bp      bp      bp                            b                                        bw Arctic Plains and Mountains  (Chukchi  & Beaufort Seas, also Arctic Ocean and Hudson Bay)        3                  bp      bp      bp                            b                              b         b Northwestern Interior Forest                                                                                                                 4                          b                             b                                        bw Northern  Pacific Rainforest (Gulf of Alaska, California Current)                                                    5            p        p       bp       p                 wm    bw    bwm    wm                 bw Boreal Taiga Plains                                                                                                                                         6                     b                                      bm       b       bm
Taiga Shield and Hudson Plains (Newfoundland-Labrador Shelf, also Hudson Bay)                        7                 p       bp       p                             b        b        b         b
Boreal Softwood Shield (Newfoundland-Labrador Shelf)                                                                      8    p        p        p                   p                             b        b        b       bw
Great Basin                                                                                                                                                                   9                                          wm   bwm  bwrr                  b
Northern  Rockies                                                                                                                                       10                              m    bwm  bwrr
Prairie Potholes                                                                                                                                      11                                                                                                                              bm     bm
Boreal Hardwood Transition                                                                                                                 12                                  b                  bw Lower Great Lakes/St. Lawrence Plain                                                                                               13                                                     bw                 bw Atlantic Northern  Forest  (Scotian Shelf, NE US Continental Shelf)                                                  14   p        p        p        p        p                                      bm                 bw Sierra Nevada                                                                                                                                        15                                  w     bwrr Southern Rockies/Colorado Plateau                                                                                                     16                                 wm   bwrr Badlands and Prairies                                                                                                                            17                                 bm     bm Shortgrass Prairie                                                                                                                                  18                                  w     bwrr Central Mixed-grass Prairie                                                                                                                  19                                  w
Edwards Plateau                                                                                                                                    20                                              w
Oaks and Prairies                                                                                                                                         21                                                      w
Eastern Tallgrass Prairie                                                                                                                        22                                               wm                 w Prairie Hardwood Transition                                                                                                                23                                               bw                  w Central Hardwoods                                                                                                                              24                                               wm
West Gulf Coastal Plain/Ouachitas                                                                                                      25                                                w
Mississippi Alluvial Valley                                                                                                                    26                              b                             w
Southeastern  Coastal Plain (SE US Continental Shelf, Gulf of Mexico)                                           27   p        p        p        p        p      bw                            w                 bw Appalachian Mountains                                                                                                                       28                                             m                  w Piedmont                                                                                                                                         29                                                w                   w New England/Mid-Atlantic Coast (NE US Continental Shelf)                                                            30   p        p        p        p        p        b                             w                 bw Peninsular Florida (SE US Continental Shelf, Gulf of Mexico)                                                          31          p        p        p        p      bw                            w                   w
Coastal California (California Current)                                                                                          32         p        p        p        p      bw       w       w       w       w                   w Sonoran and Mohave Deserts                                                                                                              33                               bw      bw                 w      wm                  w Sierra Madre Occidental                                                                                                                       34                                               w
Chihuahuan  Desert                                                                                                                              35                                                w
Tamaulipan Brushlands (Gulf of Mexico)                                                                                           36                                              w Gulf Coastal Prairie (Gulf of Mexico)                                                                                                37                             bw                            w Islas Marias (Gulf of California)                                                                                                          38
Sierras de Baja California                                                                                                                     39                                               w      m?
Desierto de Baja California (California Current, Gulf of California)                                                40        p        p        p        p                  bw      w       w       w                   w Islas de! Golfo de California (Gulf of California)                                                                               41                         bw                 w       w                   w Sierra y Planicies de El Cabo (California Current, Gulf of California)                                              42         p        p        p        p                  bw                 w       w                   w Isla Cozumel  (Caribbean Sea)                                                                                                                       57
Archipielago de Revillagigedo (Pacific Central-American  Coastal)                                                    62               p        p        p Isla Guadalupe  (California Current)                                                                                                   63               p        p        p Arrecife Alacranes  (Caribbean Sea)                                                                                                              64
Hawaii (Insular Pacific-Hawaiian)                                                                                                        67         p
(Atlantic)                                                                                                                                               at!      p        p        p        p        p (Pacific)                                                                                                                                               pac                 p        p        p        p Caribbean Islands (Caribbean Sea)                                                                                                              car                            p        p
Central America (Caribbean Sea, Pacific Central-American  Coastal)                                               cen                 p        p        p        p       w
Mexico (Gulf of Mexico, Pacific Central-American Coastal)                                                            mx                 p        p        p        p      bw      bw                 w       w

WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   69


gs
A )'l
53

Au
1                                                       w                                 bw                                       b                                                             bp      bp                                                                                  m         bp
2                   bw                           bw      b                            bm                                     p                      bp      bp       p                       b                                                     m         bp
3                                   b         b        bm       b                                                                                bp       bp      bp       b                                                                                                        bp
4                                                     m          b                                   b                                                              p                                                                                                                           b
5         bw                wm               wm    bwm                                   wm                m       w                                   p       bp       p                     bm                  m                                       m         bp
6                                                     m      bm                                      b               b                                                                       bm                                                            b        b
7                                      bw      w       m        b                                 bm                           b       p          p          p          b                        bm                                                                        b
8                               w        w        m       bw                 w      bw     bm                                     p                       p         bp                           bm                                                            b        b
9                                                               wm                                      m                bm                                                                                bm                                                          bm
10                                            m     bwm                                    bm               bm                                                                                bm                                                            m
11                                                                            bm                                     bm               bm                                                                                bm                                                            b
12                              w                                 bw                                     wm                m       b                                                                bm                                                            b
13                              w        w                     bw                                     wm                m      bw                                                                      bm                                                            b
14                             w        w                     bw                 w      b?w    wm      b                  w                                   p         bp                            m                                                  b        b       bp
15                                                      m        m                                       m                                                                                                     bm
16                                                            wm                                      m                bm                                                                                                                                                 m
17                                                       m         m                                       m                 m                                                                                 bm
18                                                                  wm                                      m                 m                                                                                                                                                  m
19                                                            wm                                      m                 m                                                                                                                                                  m
20                                wm                                      m                 m
21                                                                       w                                              w                    m
22                w                               bwm                                     m                 m                                                                                 bm                                                            m
23                             w                               bwm                                   wm                m       b                                                                bm                                                            m
24                                                           wm                                    wm                m                                                                                  m                                                            m
25                                   w                                            wm                m                                                                                  m                                                            m
26                                 w                                              w                    m                                                                        b      m                                                            m
27                                       w                     bw                 w                    wm     bw                w                                               p                     bw     bw      bw                          bw      m      bm
28                                                                m                                       m                                                                                                      m                                                            m
29                                                                        w                                              m                                                                                                      m                                                            m
30                                  w        w                     bw                 w      b?w     w       b               w                                               p                       b      bm       b                         b      bm       b       bp
31                                                                              w                     w                    wm     bw                w                                               p                     bw     bw      bw                          bw     bm       m
32      bw
w                                              w                    m       w                                   p          p                       b      bw      bw      bm                                      m         p
33                      w                                             wm                                    wm      b
bw     bw      bw       b                                  m
34                                                                        m                                     wm      w                                                                                            m
35                                                             m                                       m       w                                                                                                            m
36                                                                      wm                                      w         w        m                                                                       bw      w                                                             m
37                                                                        w                     w                      w      bw      m       w                                                                       bw     bw      bw                          bw                bm
38
39                                                                        w
40      bw
41
w                                  w          w                                              w         w                                                           p          p                                 bw      bw       b                                  m         p
bw                           w          w                                                          w                                                                                                            w        bw       b
42
57
62
63
64
67 atl pac car cen
mx
w         w                                               w                                              w         w                                                           p                                               w         w          b                                  m
m
p                                                                                                                                        p p          p                                                                                                                           p
m
bp
p                                                                                                                           p p          p                                                                         p                                                p
w                                            wm     bw      m                                                  p                       b      wm     bw                          bw     bm      bm
w                                            wm      w       m                                       p                                   w       wm       bw    wm                  bw                 m           p w                                             wm                                    wm     bw      m                                       p                                  bw    wm     bw      bm               bw                 m           p

70                                                         WATERBIRD   CONSERVATION    FOR  THE  AMERICAS






bp                                                                                                                        bp       bp                                 bp       bp        bp                                bp       bp       bp         bp         bp
2                                             bp                                                                                                                        bp       bp                     p         bp      bp      bp                           bp      bp      bp       bp       bp bp                                                                                           bp        b       bp       bp      bp      bp                 bp                                                 p
4                                         bp                                                                                                                                                           bp                                                bp
5      wrn                          bp                                      brn                                                           bp      bp                            bp      bp      bp        p                    bp      bp      bp
6        b                                                                        b
7                                                                                                             b                                            p         bp      bp        b       bp
8                                                                                                 b                                            p         bp      bp       bp      bp
9       brn                                                                    brn
10      brn                                                                    brn
11        brn               brn                                                 b
12       rn                                                                       b
13       b                                                                b
14                             b                                            b                                            p         bp       p         bp      bp
15       rn                                                                      rn
16      brn                                                                    brn
17      brn               brn                                                 b
18      brn               brn                                               brn
19      brn               brn                                               brn
20       rn                brn                                                 rn
21        w                    brn                                                 rn
22       rn                brn                                               brn
23       brn                                                                      b
24       rn                brn                                               brn
25     wrn               brn                                                 rn
26    bwrn              brn                                                 rn
27    bwrn              brn                           p          p          rn       p                                               p                                   p
28                                         rn
29       rn                                                                      rn
30       bw                 b                         p                      rn                                                  p          p          p          p          p
31         w                      b                       b?p     bp       m        bp        p
32       bw                 b                                           brn                                                           bp                                      bp      bp                 bp      p         p      bp
33        w                      b                                            rn
34       wrn                                                                     rn
35     wrn                                                                     rn
36      bw                                                                      rn
37       bw                 b                         p         bp       rn       p
38                                                                                   p                     bp
39        w
40   w                      b                                                                                                                                                                    bp     bp                 bp
41                                b
42       w                      b                                   p                      p                                                                                                                                                              p
57                                                           bp                  m      bp        p
62                                                                                           bp
63                                                                                                                                                                                                                          bp
64                                                            p                                 bp        p
67                 bp                            bp                 bp                 bp       bp      bp      bp
atl                                                                                                                                                                                              p pac                                                          p                      p                     p?        p?         p
car        w                  brn                          bp      bp       m        bp       bp
cen        w                  bw                           bp        p          m      bp       bp                 bp
mx       bw                bw                           bp        p        wrn                 p                                                                                                                                                 p

WATERBIRD   CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                                              71






1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
57
62
63
64
67 atl pac
car
cen rnx
bp       b               bp      bp                                                                                                                                                                                bw               bw     bw bp       b                  bp      bp                                                                                                                                                                                bw               bw     bw
b       bp      bp                                                                                                                                                                                                                b
bp                                                                                                                                                                                bw                          bw bp                 bp      bp                wrn   bwm    bw                                                                                                              bwrn              bw               bw     bw
b       b       b                                                                                                                      b
bp                                                                                                                                                                                                      b
bp                                                                                                      bp                                                                                            b      bw bwrn    bw     bw                                                                                                                                   bwrn
b       b          b                                                                                                                     brn
b       b      brn                                                                                                                                      b                                             b b
b
bp                                                                                                      bp                                                                                            b      bw
b    b    b                                                                                                                      rn bwrn     b        b                                                                                                                     brn b        b        b                                                                                                                      b
bw       b        b                                                                                                                     brn bw       b        b                                                                                                                     bw
w                                                                                                                                                                                      w
w                                                                                                                                                 b                b     bwrn brn
b       b       b                                                                                                                      b
wrn
wrn                                                                                                                          b                   b       bw                                                  b
bw                           bw                                                 bw bw                                                                       p                                                                      bw                           bw      w                            w         bw
wrn wrn
p                                                                                                                         p                                                                                                           bw      w                                         b
bw                                                                       p                     bp                             p        bw                           bw                                     bw      bw bp                            bp                 bw     bw     bw       p                                                                                                                       bw                bw                          bw                   w
w      bw     bw       p                                                                                                                         w      bw     bw                                     bw      bw
bw     bw     bw                                                                                                                          bw
w      bw     bw                                                                                                                          bw     wm
w                                                                                                                                               bw                bw      w                                                 bw
w         w         w                                               p                                                           p      bw                bw      w                                      bw      bw

w      bw     bw                                                                                                                                                                                            w
p                                                           w         w         w        bp                                      bp       p                             p                    bw     bw     bw                           w         bw      bw
w         w                    bp                                      bp      bp                            bp                bw                bw                                     bw
w         w         w        bp                                      bp       p                                   p                      w                                                                     bw        w p
bp                 bp       bp
bw

bp       bp                           bp                 bp       bp
p
p          p                                   p
bw                                      bp                 bp       p                     bp                 bp       bp     bw                bw     bw                                     bw      bw bw       w                                  p                                               p          p                      p         bp     bw                bw                                               bw      bw
bw      bw     bw     bw       p                                               p          p         bp       p          p      bw      w      bw     bw                                     bw      bw

72                                                                                                          WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS








2


4
5                                 bw                bw               bw     bm               bw                          bw                                                                                           m                                wm   bwm
6                                                    bm                           m                                                          b                                                                                                                           bm
7                                                                   m
8                                                         bm                           m
9                              bm              bwm            bwm    bm                                             bwm                                                                                        bm                         bwm
10                            bm              bwm                         m                                                 b                                                                                           bm                          bm
II      bm                bm                bw               bm     bm                 b                     bm      b                                                                                           bm                          bm
12                                                   b                    bm     bm                 b                     bm     bw                                                                                                                          bm
13                                                   bw               bm     bm                 b                             b
14      bm                  b                 bw                m         m                     b                             b
15                                                  m                            m                 m                           bw                                                                                           b                          bwm
16                            bm                bw               bm     bm                                               bw                                                                                          bm                          bm
17                                                 bw                           m                                                 b                                                                                             b                                  bm
18                             m                 bw              wm     bm                                               bw                                                                                          bm                          bm
19      bm                bm                bw              wm     bm               bm               bm     bw                                                                                          bm                           m
20   b                 m                 bw                w       m                bw                          bw                                                                                           m                            w
21         b                bm                bw               bw      m                   bw                 b      bw                                                                                           m                                  w
22       m                      m                 bw               bm     bm                 b                 bm     bw                                                                                           m
23                           bm                bw               bm     bm                 b                 bm     bw
24      bm                  b                 bw               bm     bm                 b                   b      bw                                                                                           m
25    b                 b                 bw               bw    bwm               b                       b      bw                                                         bwm                         m                            w                       m
26      bw                bw                bw               bw    bwm               b                 bw     bw                                                         bwm              bw                            b      wm                  m
27      bw                bw                bw               bw     bw               bw                bw     bw                                                         bwm              bw                           w       w      bw     bwm
28   m                                      bw               bm     bm                 b                 bm
29   m                  m                    bw               bm     bm                 b                  m     bw                                                          wm                                                                                 m
30      bw                bw                bw               bw     bm                 b                 bm     bw                                                          wm                b                                                wm
31       bw                bw                bw               bw     bw               bw                bw     bw                                                           bw               bw                          bw      w      bw       bw
32     wm                bw                bw               bw     bm               bw                          bw                                                                                          bw                            w      bw
33      bw                bw                bw               bw     bw               bw                bw     bw                                                           bw                         wm               bw      w      bw        m
34                          bwm              bw               bw     bm               bw                          bw                                                                                         wm                           w
35                          bwm              bw                w       m                bw                          bw                                                                                         wm                           w
36      bw                bw                bw                w      bw               bw                bw     bw                                                          wm                          w                    bw     bw
37      bw                bw                bw               bw     bw               bw                bw     bw                                                           bw               bw     bw                bw     bw     bw        m
38
39              w                                      w      bw               bw                                                                                                                          m
40      bw                bw                bw                w       m                bw                bw     bw                                                          wm                          w                                  w      bw
41        m                                      bw                w       m                                                                                                                                                                                w      bw
42       w                      w                 bw                w       m                bw                 w      bw                                                           bw                           w                                  w      bw
57
62
63
64                                                                                 m
67 atl pac
car      bw                bw                bw               bw     bw               bw                bw                                                          bw     bw               bw                          bw                bw       bw cen    b?w                 bw    bw       w      bw     bw     bw     bw     bw     bw     bw     bw    bw      bw     bw     bw     bw     bw    bw      bw      w      bw     bw              bwm     bw mx      bw                bw                bw               bw     bw               bw     bw     bw     bw    bw      bw                          bw     bw               bw     bw                bw     bw    'bwm     bwm

WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   73






1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
57
62
63
64
67 atl pac
car
bp                            p                                  p                                                                                                                                     p          p                                   p            p bp                            p                                                                                                                                                                          p          p                                   p            p bp                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       p

bp                            p                                  p                                                                                                                                     p          p          p                      p            p


p          p
bp                                                                                                                                                          p                                                            p          p






p                                                                                                                                                                                     p                                                            p          p














p                                                                                                                                                                                                   p                     p                                                            p          p



p                                                            p          p
bp                                                                                                                                                                      p                     p                                                            p
p                                    p                                                                       p                                                                                                                                     p          p          p                      p            p
bp




p                                                                                                                                                                                                                           p



bp                                                                                                                                                                                                                p          p          p                      p
bp
p                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 p          p

bp       bp                                                                                                                                                                                         bp                                                  p p

bp     bp                 bp       p          p        bp       p          p         p         bp     bp        p          p                                 bp                 bp                  p                                   p            p p                                                                                                                                               p?         p?                    p                                                            p          p
p                      p         p          p          p          p          p          p         p          p         p           p          p                                  p                       p          p          p          p                      p            p
bp                                                                                                                                                          bp      bp                 p
cen       bw     bp
mx      bw     bp
p                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                p                      p p                                              p                                                                                                             p                                                                       p                       p                      p

74                                                                                                          WATERBIRD   CONSERVATION    FOR  THE  AMERICAS






p          p          p                                                                       bp                                      bp
2                                               p          p          p                                                                       bp                                      bp


4
5                                                                                  p          p          p                                                                       bp                             p      bp
6
7                         p                                                                                                                                                               p
8                    bp                                                                                  p                                                          bp
9
10
II
12
13
14                  p                                                                                                 p                                                          bp
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27                  p                                               p                                               p                                                            p
28
29
30                     p                                               p                                               p                                                          bp
31                                                                            p                                               p                                                            p
32                                                          p                                  p          p          p                       p                                 bp                bp       bp       p
33                                                                                                                                                 p                                                           p
34
35
36
37
38
39
40                     p         bp                            p          p                                  bp       p                     bp                bp        p
41                                                                                                                                   bp                                                bp
42                                       p                                                            p                                   p         p                       p                      p
57
62                                      bp                                                 bp
63                                                 bp                            p         bp                                                            bp                            p?
64
67      bp                bp                           bp       p        bp       bp       p         bp                          bp                 bp atl                     p                                                                                                 p                                                            p
pac        p                      p                                               p          p          p          p           p                                 p           p         p                                   p car                                                                     bp                                       p                                                            p
cen                                                                      p                                               p                                   p         p           p
mx                                              p          p          p                                   p                                   p         p         p           p                      p

WATERBIRD   CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                                              75
KI0ML.D6INT

We wish to thank members  of the Advisory Committee for their engagement, advice, and review of various materials: David Allen, Bob Altman, Ghisselle Alvarado,  Brad Andres, Jon Andrew, Maurice  Anselme,  Donald  Anthony, Adreanna Araya, Jennifer Arnold, Kristine Askerooth,  Bruce Batt,  Fred Baumgarten,  Carol Beardmore,  Brian  Bell, Theodore Below, Glenn  Belyea,  Rob Bennetts,  Silvano Benvenuti,  Robert Blohm, Hans  Blokpoel,Thurman  Booth,  Lisa Borgia,  Steve Bouffard, Jennifer Boyce,  Patricia Bradley, Joel Brice,  Stephen Brown,  Larry Bryan, Joseph  Buchanan,  Laura Burford, Joanna Burger, Winifred  Burkett,  Rob Butler, Vernon  Byrd, Carolyn Caldwell, Bianca Capuano, Montserrat Carbonell, Harry Carter,  Mike Carter, Dan  Casey, John Castrale, Andrea Cerovski, Mauricio  Cervantes,  Heather Chaffey,  Gilles Chapdelaine, John  Chardine, Jean  Cohn,Therese  Conant, Richard  Cook,  Fred Cooke, Jorge Coppen,  Jim Corven,  Ken Cox, John Croxall,  Octavio Cruz,  Francie Cuthbert,  Reggie David, Jill Dechant, Tony Diamond,  Rachel Diebboll,  Paul Doherty, Laura Dominguez, Terry Doyle, Jeff Drahota,  Mark
Drever, Diane  Drigot,  Kim Dryden,  Susan Earnst,  Chris Eber• ly, Linda Elliott,  Steve Emslie, Mick Erickson,  C Greg Esslinger, Mike Estey,  Stewart Fefer,  Suzanne  Fellows, George Fenwick,  Richard  Fischer,  Sharon  Fish,  Jane Fitzgerald, Eliza• beth Flint,  Robert Ford, Doug Forsell,  Rod Fowler,  Glen Fox, Gail Fraser, Peter Frederick, Joseph  Furbert,  Lynn Gape,  Lisa Gelvin-Innaver, Richard  Gibbons, Frank Gill,  Eric Gilman,
Phil Glass, John Gobielle, Walker  Golder, Paula Gouse, Todd Grant, Chris Grondahl,  Scott Hall,  Rob Hall,  Keith Hamer, Janelle Hancock,  Fran Harty, Jeremy  Hatch, Jeff Hatfield, Katie Haws,  Chuck  Hayes,  Floyd Hayes,  Lindsey Hayes, Loren Hays,  Greg Hellyer, Janos Hennicke,  Gudrun Hilger• loh, Randy  Hill,Thor  Hjarsen,  Cathleen Hodges, Roger
Hollevoet,  Bill Howe, Marshall  Howe,  Stan Howe, Darcy Hu, Laura Hubers, Jay Huner,  Chuck  Hunter,  Gary Huschle, David Hyrenbach,  Larry Igl,  David Irons,  Gary Ivey,  Sarah
Jamieson, Dave Jenkins,  Heather Johnson,  Stephanie Jones, Scott Kahan, Jeni Keisman, Caroline  Kennedy, Judith Kennedy, Tommy  King, Vern Kleen,  Gregg Knutsen,  Bill Kolodnicki,  Oliver  Komar,  Mark LaBarr, Pierre Lamothe,
Teodoro  Lara,  Linda Leddy,  Richard  Levad,  Celia Lewis,  Lake
Lewis,  Steve Lewis,  Carol Lively,  Michael  Langlois,  Roy Lowe, Andrew  Maclachlan,  Elizabeth Madden,Art Martell, Sumner Matteson,  David Mazurkiewicz, Joe McCauley,  Cal McCluskey,  Leonard  McDaniel,  Ronald  McDonald,  Laura Mcfarlane Tranquilla, Joan McKearnan, Keith McNight, Will Meeks,  David Mehlman,  Eric Mellink,  Robert  Mesta,  R.L. Miller, Andrew  Milliken,  Kyra Mills, Marc Minno, Amy Mor• gan,  Ken Morgan,  Seth  Mott,Allan  Mueller,  Pablo Munguia, Tom Murphy, Luis Naranjo,  Maura  Naughton, Neal Neimuth, Eric Nelson,  S. Kim Nelson,  Scott Newman,  Ian Newton, Jim Nichols, Ian Nisbet,  Fernando  Nunez,  Paul O'Conner,  Leslie Ogden  Evans, James Ortego, Eduardo  Palacios,  Barbara Pardo, Hee  Cheon  Park, David Pashley,  Don  Paul, Cynthia Pekarik, Diane  Pence,  Cyndi  Perry, Bruce Peterjohn, Daniel  Petit, Mila Plavsic, Gary Popotnik, Tim Post, Fritz Prellwitz, Tim Prior, Rocky Pritchert,  Cynthia Ragland, Jean-Francois Rail,  Barnett
Rattner, Mason Reid, Fritz Reid,  Ron Reynolds, Terry Rich, Kim Rivera, Will Roach,  Sharon Roberts,  Greg Robertson, Steve Rockwood, Jim Rodgers,  Rose Rojas, Ken Rosenberg, Karen Rowe,  Cory Rubin,  Marie Ryan,  Pierre Ryan,  Ronnie Sanchez, Jorge Sandoval,  Lori Sargent, John Sauer, Jean• Pierre Savard, William  Scharf, Paul  Schmidt,Ann  Schnapf, Elizabeth A. Schreiber, Bill Schultze,  Camille  Sewall, Dawn
Sherry, Mark Shieldcastle,  Barry Smith,  David  Smith,  Graham
Smith,  Laura Sommers,  Bettina Sparrowe, Jeffrey Spendelow, Anne  Storey,  Bob Strader, Dennis  Summers-Smith,Ann  Sut• ton,  Bill Sydeman, Jean Takekawa,  Mike Tansy,  Steven Thomas, Jocelyn Thrace, Hector Torres, Adrianne  Tossas, Jeff Trollinger, Barry Truitt, Jane Tutton,  Len Ugarenko, Lourdes Valdes,  Bill Vermillion,Anthony Viggiano, Kate Wallace, George Wallace,  Craig Watson, Keith Watson, David Wege, Linda Welch, Troy Wellicome, Jeff Wells, D.V. Chip Weseloh, Francis Wiese, Alexandra  Wilke,  E.J. Williams, Kevin Willis,
Barry Wilson, Jeff Wilson,  Brad Winn,  Corey Wisneski, Donna
Withers, Mark Woodrey, Marilet Zablan, Tara Zimmerman, Jim Zohrer.

We appreciate  those who participated  in the workshops  that took place during the course of developing the Plan and those who reviewed  parts of early drafts of the plan or pro• vided reports, analyses and information  in support  of the plan.

Research and Scientific  Information Workshops: Trish Adams, Michael Avery,  Cheryl  Baduini,  Robert  S. Baker, Jeb Below, Robert  Bennetts,  Silvano Benvenuti,  Larry Bryan,  Rob Butler, Venon  Byrd, Ruth  Beck,  Sean Boyd, Julie Brashears, Winnie  Burkett,  Phil Capitolo, Bianca Capuano, Harry  Carter, John Castrale, Heather Chaffey, John Chardine, Jean Cohn, Fred Cooke, John Croxall, Tony Diamond,  Paul Doherty,
Laura Dominguez,  Nancy  Douglass, Terry Doyle,  Lauren
DuBois, Erik Egensteiner,  Stewart Fefer, Doug Forsell,  Glen Fox,  Gail Fraser, Bryan Gates, Dale Gawlik,  Scott Hall,  Keith Hamer, Janelle  Hancock,Anne Harfenist, Brian Harrington, Jeremy  Hatch, Jeff Hatfield, Janos Hennicke,  Gudrun Hilger• loh,  Stan Howe, Nancy  Hoffman, Jay Huner, David  Hyren• bach, David  Irons,  Sarah Jamieson,  Dave Jenkins, Arthur Ket• tle, Judith Kennedy, Tommy  King,  Stephanie Koch, Pierre Lamothe,  Celia Lewis,  Don  Lyons,  Rob MacDonald,  David Mazurkiewicz, Don  McCrimmon,  Laura Mcfarlane Tranquil• la, Joan McKearnan, Eric Mellink, Vivian Mendenhall,  Steven Miller,  Ken Morgan,  Laurie Ness, Ian Newton, James Nichols, Ian Nisbet,  Donna  O'Daniel,  Leslie Evans Ogden,  Hee
Cheon  Park, Cynthia Pekarik, Greg Robertson,  Dan Roby,
Robert Powell, Nancy  Read,  Kim Rivera,  Sharon Roberts, Marie Ryan,  Pierre Ryan,  Ellen Saksefski, Jean-Pierre Savard, Ann Schaupf,  Paula Schneeberger,  Stan Senner, Nanette Seto, Leslie Slater, Jeff Spendelow, Anne  Storey, Dennis  Summers• Smith, Julie Thayer, Angeline Tillmanns, Mark Tobin, Tim Towles, Troy Wellicome,  Francis Wiese, Brad Winn,  Ricardo Zambrano.

76                                                        WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
Monitoring  Workshops:  Jon Bart,  David F.  Brinker, Vernon Byrd, Harry  Carter, John  Chardine,  Malcolm  Coulter, Tina de Cruz, Francie Cuthbert,  Diane  Drigot,  Beth Flint,  Doug Forsell,  Colleen  Henson,Thor Hjarsen,  Cathleen Hodges, Nancy  Hoffman,  Darcy  Hu,  David Irons, Dave Jenkins, Terrell Kelley,  Leilani Leach,  Roy Lowe, Kyra Mills, Maura
Naughton, Jim Nichols, Tony Palermo,  Sheldon Plentovich,
John Polhemus, Katharine Parsons,  Rich Paul, Bruce Peter• john,  Diann  Prosser, Mark Rauzon,  Sharon  Reilly, Jim Rodgers,  Betty Anne  Schreiber, Jorge Saliva, John  Sauer, Joshua  Seamon,  Mike Silbernagle,  David  Smith,  Graham Smith, Katie Swift, Tom Telfer, Kim Uyehara

Regional Workshops:  Brad Allen, David Allen, Bob Altman, Ghisselle  M.Alvarado  Quesada, Julia Ambagis,  Maurice Anselme,  Donald  Anthony, Adrianna Araya, Portia Aruntun• ian,Aileen  Bainton,  Charles  Baxter,  Carol Beardmore, Brian Bell,  Dade  Bell,  Marcia Beltre, Brian Benedict,  Dwight Berg• eron,  Laurel  Bernard,  Doug  Bertram,  Hans  Blokpoel,Thur• man Booth,  Steve Bouffard, Jennifer Boyce, Andrew Boyne, Patricia Bradley, Joel Brice, Laura Burford, Vernon  Byrd, Amaury Camacho Saura, Montserrat Carbonell,  Harry  Carter, Mike Carter,  Daniel  Casey, Juan  Castillo, Andrea  Cerovski, Farfan M.  Cervantes,  Michiyo  Chochi, Therese   Conant,  Kevin Connor, Jorge L. Coppen, James Daley,  Suzanne Davis, Jill Dechant,  Dennis  Denis Avila, James Daley, Reggie David, Diane  De Luca,  Marcelo  Del Puerto,  Kate Devlin, Tony Dia• mond,Andrew  Dobson,Anthony  Donald, Terry J. Doyle,  Leo Douglas, Jeff Drahota,  Diane  Drigot, John Drury, Kim Dry• den,  Susan Earnst,  Linda Elliott,  Michael  Erickson,  Greg Esslinger, Luis A. Espinosa  G., Mike Estey, Norman Famous, Stewart Fefer, Beth Flint,  Bob Ford, Joseph  Furbert,  Lynn Gape,  Eric Gilman, Jim Glahn, Walker  Golder, Wing
Goodale, Terry Goodhue, Jose Jaime  Gonzalez, Todd  Grant, Dedreic  Grecian,  Rob Hall,  Scott Hall,  Christine Hamilton, Fran Harty, Jeremy  Hatch,  Lindsey Hayes,  Laird Henkel, Randy Hill,  Osuel  Hinojesn,  Cathleen Hodges, Tom  Hodg• man,  Roger Hollevoet,  Bob Houston,  Laura Hubers, Jay Huner,  Gary Huschle, Larry lgl,  Gary Ivey, Ariam Jimanez Reyes, Brad Keitt, Paul Kelly, Vernon  Kleen,  Hugh  Kuechtel, Jasper  Lament,  Michael  Langlois, Teodoro   Lara,Anthony Levesque, Lake Lewis,  Steve Lewis, Rob  MacDonald,Andrew MacLachlan,  Elizabeth Madden, Jeremy  Madeiros,  Chad Manlove, Ruben  Manogula  Hores,  Saenz Mariella,  Sumner Matteson, David  Mazurkiewicz, Joe McCauley,  Gerry  McCh• esney, Mark McCollough,  Donald  McDougal,  Keith McK• night, Matthew McKowan, Will Meeks, Luis Omar, Melian Hernandez, Elen Miller, Jose Morales  Leal,  Slade Moore, Tom Moorman,  Leal Jose Morales,  Seth Mott,  Romualdo Mtz,
Allan Mueller,  Susana Mugeria  Aguila,  Lourdes  Mugica Valdes,  Luis G. Naranjo, Maura  Naughton,Anselme Naunce, Marcia Neltre,  Scott Newman,  Neal Niemuth,  Paul O'Con• nor, Don  Orr, Eduardo Palacios,  Michael  Parker; David  Pash• ley, Don  S.  Paul,  Diane  Pence,  Cyndi  Perry,  Clive Petrovic, Roberto  Phillips,  David Pitkin,  Gary J. Popotnik,Ana  Preda, Rocky Pritchert, Julio Ramos, Mark Rauzon,  Fritz Reid,  Ron Reynolds, Terry Rich,  Kim Rivera,  Steve Rockwood,  Jim Rodgers,  Nora  Rojek,  Karen Rowe,  Cory Rubin, John Ryder, Lori Sargent, William  Scharf, Ann  Schnapf,  Bill Schultze,
Nanette Seto, Bill Shepherd,  Mark Shieldcastle, Nelson Shilders, Victoria Siowik,  David  Smith, David  A Smith, Tasha Smith,Thorn  Smith,  Eliser Socarrs Torres, Art Sowls, Bob Strader, Ann  Sutton,Akiuori Takahashi, Julie Thayer,  Steve Thomas, Jocelyn Thrace, Lance Tikell,Adrianne  G. Tossas,
Kim Tripp, Barry Truitt,  Lindsay Tudor,  Bill Uihlein, R.  Eduar• do Vasquez, Loidy Vazquez  Ramos, Bill Vermillion,Anthony Viggiano, Kate Wallace,  Carolyn Wardle,  Sharon Ware,  Craig Watson, Keith Watson, David Wege, Linda Welch,  Chip Weseloh, Tony White, James Wiley, Emily Jo Williams, Kevin Willis, Barry Wilson, Jeff Wilson,  Randy Wilson, David Wingate, Donna  Withers, Joseph Wonderle, Mark Woodrey, Marilet A. Zablan, Tara Zimmerman.

First North American  Waterbird Conference:  David  H.
Allen,  Ghisselle  M.Alvarado  Quesada, Dan Anderson, Jon M. Andrew, Jennifer  Arnold,Theodore  H. Below,  Glenn  Belyea, Thurman Booth, Jennifer A. Boyce, Joseph  B. Buchanan, Winifred Below Burkett,  Rob Butler,  George  Vernon  Byrd, Harry  Carter, John S. Castrale,  Gilles Chapdelaine, Therese Ann  Conant,  Francie Cuthbert, Jill Andrae  Dechant,  Steven D. Emslie,  Clinton Greg Esslinger,  Mike Estey,  Stewart I.
Fefer,  Sharon  Marie Fish,  Jane Ann Fitzgerald, Beth Flint,
Robert  P. Ford,  Doug  Forsell,  Lisa Gelvin-Inna,  Richard  Gib• bons, John  Gobeille, Walker  Golder,  Scott Hall,  Jeremy Hatch, Katie V. Haws,  Chuck Hayes, Thor  Hjarsen,  Bill Howe, Jay van Huizen Huner, William  C. Hunter, David Irons,  Gary Ivey, David Jenkins,  Stephanie Lee Jones, Jeni
Keisman,  Stephanie Koch, William  Joseph  Kolodnicki, Oliver
Komar, Mark LaBarr, Regina G. Lanning,  Linda Leddy,
Richard  Levad, Steve Lewis, Carol  Lively, Roy Lowe, Andrew MacLachlan, Jeff Marcus, Art Martell, Sumner Matteson, Cal McCluskey, Will Meeks, David  Mehlman,  Eric Mellink,
Robert  Mesta,  Bob Miller,  Steve Miller, Andrew Milliken, Kyra Mills, Marc Minno, Ken Morgan,  Seth  Mott,Allan Mueller, Thomas  M.  Murphy,  Maura  Naughton, Eric C. Nel• son,  Scott Newman,  Ian C. T. Nisbet,  Paul J. O'Connor,
George  Oliver, James Brent Ortego, Eduardo Palacios, Barbara J. Pardo,  David  Pashley, Don  Paul, Diane  Pence,  Cyndi  M. Perry, Bruce Peterjohn, Cynthia Ragland, Jean-Francois  Rail, James Rodgers, Kenneth Rosenberg,  Elizabeth A. Schreiber, Heather Johnson Schultz,  Graham W.  Smith,  David  A. Smith, Laura  Sommers, Jeffrey A.  Spendelow, Ken  Stromborg,Ann Sutton, Michael  G. Tansy,  Steve Thomas, Barry Truitt,  Bill Vermillion, J. Keith Watson, J. Craig Watson, David Wege, Linda Welch, Jeff Wells, D.V. Chip Weseloh,Alexandra  L. Wilke, Barry C. Wilson, Bradford Winn, Tara Zimmerman.

Marshbird workshop:  Bob Altman,Alison  Banks,  Carol Beardsmore,  Gerard  Beyersbergen,  Pamela Bilbeisi,  Heidi Bogner, Andree  Breault,  John Bruggink,  Daniel  Casey, John Cecil,  Gregory  Clune,  Courtney Conway, Jorge Correa  San• doval, Miguel  Cruz, Jill Dechant,  Dean  Demarest, James Dinsmore,  David  Dolton,  Sam Droege,  Frank Durbian,  Bill Eddleman, Jules Evens, David  Evers, Helen  Hands,  Stephen Hanus,  Bill Howe, Marshall  Howe,  Gary Ivey,  Scott Johnson, David  Klute,  Meg Laws,  Michael  Legare, Rich Levad,  Soch Lor, Jim Mattsson, Jon McCracken, Eric Mellink,  Robert Mesta, Tamara  Mills,  Maura  Naughton,  Eric Nelson,  Neal

WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  AMERICAS                                                                                                                                                                   77
Niemuth,  Dan  Niven,  Charles  Paine,  David  Pashley;  Diane Pence,  Cyndi  Perry,  Ken Rosenberg,  Robert Russell,  Todd Sanders,  David  Sharp,  Mark  Shieldcastle,  Nathaniel  Stricker,
Steven  Timmermans,  J. Craig Watson, D.V. Chip Weseloh,
Jennifer  Wheeler, Alexandra Wilke, James Woehr.

We wish to acknowledge those who provided  information, wrote preliminary reports and analyses, and reviewed  data and findings  and reviewed drafts of the plan:  Ghisselle  M. Alvarado  Quesada, Jennifer Arnold,  Carol Beardmore,  Brad Blodget, Joanna  Burger, Rob Butler, Vernon  Byrd,  Harry Carter, John  Castrale, John P.  Cecil,  Gilles Chapelaine,  Peter Doherty, Troy Ettel,  Suzanne  D. Fellows,  Robert Ford, James F.  Glahn, Karla Guyn,  Mike Harris, Jeremy  Hatch,  Floyd Hayes, John  Herron,Thor Hjarson, Mark D. Howery, Jay
Huner, David  Irons,  Gary Ivey,  Dave Jenkins,  Stephanie Jones, D. Tommy  King,  Oliver  Komar,  Ron Lambeth,  Steve Lewis, Kevin Loftus,  Roy Lowe, Brent Ortego, Laurie  Maynard, Robert Mesta,  Ken Morgan,Allen Mueller,  Maura  Naughton, S.  Kim Nelson,  Ian C. T. Nisbet, Robin Niver, Paul O'Connor, Bruce Peterjohn, Daniel  Petit, Jen-Francois  Rail,  Barnett Rat• tner, Terry Rich,  Kim Rivera, Jay Roberson, Jeff Spendelow, Eileen  Dowd  Stukel,Ann  Sutton, Brian Swift, John Tautin, Barry Truitt, William Vermillion, J. Craig Watson, David
Wege,  Scott Werner, Bill Wichers, Robert D. Williams,
William  Whitman, Brad Winn.

The assessment of conservation status of 166 waterbird species  contained  in the plan would  not have been  possible without  broad participation  from the ornithological and wildlife  management communities in North America,  Cen• tral America,  and the Caribbean.The following  contributed valuable time and expertise  to the development of species information  and conservation status assessment:  Dave Allen, Ghisselle  Alvarado,  Dave Anderson, Jennifer  Arnold, Stephen Bailey,  Guy Baldassarre, Jon Bart,  Carol Beardmore, Marc B~lisle, Gerard  Beyersbergen, Keith Bildstein,Anthony  Bled• soe, Brad Blodget,  Dee Boersma,  Larry Bryan,  Francine  Buck• ley, P.A. Buckley, Joanna Burger,  Gary Burness, Dee Butler, Robert Butler, Ron Butler, Vernon  Byrd,  David  Cairns,  Harry Carter, John  Castrale,  Gilles Chapdelaine, John  Chardine, Malcolm  Coulter,  Sean Cullen,  Francie Cuthbert,  Robert
Day, Anthony Diamond,  George  Divoky,  David Duffy, Jeanette Dumas, Erica Dunn,  Richard  Elliot,  Michael  Erwin, Troy Ettel,  Pete Ewins, Janey Fadely, Beth Flint,  Bob Ford, Glen Fox,  Gill Fraser, Peter  Frederick,Anthony  Gaston, Richard  Gibbons,  Grant Gilchrist, James  Glahn, Thomas Good,  Christopher Haney,  Mike Harris, Jeremy  Hatch,  Scott Hatch,  Lindsey Hayes, Helen  Hays,  Caroline  Herziger, Michelle  Hester, Thor  Hjarsen,  Keith Hobson,  Mark Howery, Falk Huettman, Jay Huner,  Chuck  Hunter, David  Irons,  Gary Ivey, Joseph Jehl Jr., Bill Kolodnicki, Steve Kress, Kathy Kuletz, James Kushlan, David  Lee,  Steve Lewis, Elizabeth Logerwell, Roy Lowe,  David  Manuwal, Terry Master,  Don McCrimmon, Martin  K. McNicholl, Jennifer Megyesi,  Eric Mellink,  Robert  Mesta, William  Montevecchi,  Ken Morgan, Ralph  Morris, Allan Mueller, Maura  Naughton,  S. Kim Nel• son,  Steve Nesbitt,  Scott Newman,  Kenneth Niethammer, I.C.T. Nisbet, Michael  North,  Gary Nuechterlein,  Paul O'Connor, John  Ogden,  Brent Ortego, Katharine Parsons,
Michael  Patten, Rich Paul, Bruce Peterjohn, Ray Pierotti,  Pam
Pietz, James Quinn,  Kim Rivera,  Gregory  Robertson, James Rodgers,  Michael  Rodway, Ken Rosenberg, John Ryder, Jorge Correa  Sandoval,  Elizabeth Schreiber, Nanette Seto,  David Shealer, Mark Sheilds, Doug  Siegel-Causey, Theodore Simons, Jeff Spendelow,  Charla  Sterne, Bryan Swift, William  Syde• man, Raymond Telfair, Thomas  Telfer, Bernie Tershy, Bruce Thompson, John Trapp,  Barry Truitt, Nicolaas Verbeek, Bill Vermillion,  George Wallace,  David Wege,  Scott Werner, D.V. (Chip)  Weseloh,  William  Whitman, G.C. Whittow,  R. Haven Wiley, Bill Williams.

We wish to thank colleagues who made special  contributions to the Plan. We owe special thanks to Craig Johnson  for his design of the Plan logo. We also wish to thank colleagues associated with U.S. Geological  Survey, Patuxent Wildlife Research  Center and Manomet Center for Conservation Sciences: Kinard Boone,  Stephen Brown,  Patty Hoban, Jeni Keisman, Regina Lanning,  Sky Lesnick,  Lois Loges,  Carmen Rivera, Marilyn Whitehead,  Corey Wisneski  and Alex Wilke. We also thank Merrie  Morrison  of American Bird Conservancy for her work in coordinating and Sue Dodge  for designing the publication.





















78                                                         WATERBIRD  CONSERVATION   FOR  THE  AMERICAS
Agenda and OrganizationProviding peial uport


We thank  the  organizations that permitted the  authors to work on this project: BirdLife International,  Cornell  Laboratory of Ornithology,  Environment Canada• Canadian  Wildlife  Service,  International Association of Fish and Wildlife  Agencies, Manomet Center for Conservation Sciences,  National Audubon Society,  Point Reyes Bird Observatory,  Pronatura,  Smithsonian Environmental Research  Center, Universi• ty of Havana, University of Virginia,  U.S.D.A. Forest Service,  U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, U.S.  Geological  Survey, Wetlands International,  and Wisconsin  Department of Natural Resources. We also thank  those  organizations that provided resources  for the  project:Arkansas  Game  and Fish Commission,  British Airways,  Ducks Unlimit• ed,  International Association of Game  and Fish Agencies, Manomet Center for Con• servation  Sciences, National Marine  Fisheries Service, U.S.D.A. Forest Service, U.S. Fish and Wildlife  Service,  and U.S.  Geological  Survey. We thank  American Bird
Conservancy for overseeing  the publication of the  Plan.








D}, AMERICAN
es
/CONSERVANCY





Audubon




R BirdLife IR4II04l
Together  for birds end people




BRITISH AIRWAYS
«CORNELL LAB of ORNITHOLOGY                 (a

I E:7
Canadian Wlife

Environnement
Canada
Service canadien
DUCKS
Service
de la faune



1Ar
.SM




Smithsonian  Environmental
Research Center                              VNIVERSIDAD DE LA HABANA
UNLIMITED


PRBOY




add
UvvmEiisn rr
'VIRGINIA
Canada



~-
PROMIUR4


id


ti
w t0


~. .,,.




science for a changing world


WETLANDS
INTERNATIONAL




BACK  COVER:Clockwise  from top left:White  Ibis,© Walker  Golder;Sora,©  Peter  LaTourrette; Common Tern, O Walker Golder;Laysan  Albatross, © Melanie Steinkamp;Brown  Pelican, O Walker Golder

























































WATERBIRD (0NS£RATION for thie AI[AIU
